CANON V EQUALITY 

Every lawyer shall adhere to the principle of equality and hold firmly thebelief that every person, regardless of nationality or ethnicity, color, sexualorientation or gender identity, religion, disability, age, marital status, social oreconomic status, and other like circumstances, has the fundamental right to equaltreatment and representation.As such, the lawyer shall accord equal respect, attention, dedication and zealin advancing the client’s cause, regardless of personal opinion, religious or politicalbeliefs pertaining on the personal circumstances of the client, except for justifiablereasons.

SECTION 1. Non-discrimination. — A lawyer shall not declineto represent a person solely on account of the latter’s nationality orethnicity, sexual orientation or gender identity, religion, disability, age,marital status, social or economic status, political beliefs, or suchlawyer’s or the public’s opinion regarding the guilt of said person,except for justifiable reasons.

SECTION 2. Treatment of vulnerable persons. — In dealingwith a client who belongs to a vulnerable sector, a lawyer shall bemindful and sensitive of, and consider the client's specialcircumstances, as well as the applicable laws and rules.The lawyer shall observe a higher standard of service suited tothe particular needs of the vulnerable person and shall assert suchperson’s right to meaningful access to justice.A vulnerable person is a person who is at a higher risk of harmthan others, and shall include children, the elderly, the homeless,persons with disability, persons deprived of liberty, human rightsvictims, victims of domestic violence, victims of armed conflict, thosewho are socio-economically disadvantaged, those who belong to racialor ethnic minorities, or those with debilitating physical or mentalconditions.

SECTION 3. Indigent person. — A lawyer shall not refuse therepresentation of an indigent person, except if:(a) the lawyer is not in a position to carry out the work effectivelyor competently due to a justifiable cause;(b)the lawyer will be placed in a conflict-of-interest situation; or(c) the lawyer is related to the potential adverse party, within thesixth degree of consanguinity or affinity, or to the adversecounsel, within the fourth degree.An indigent is any person who has no money or propertysufficient for food, shelter and other basic necessities for oneself andone’s family.

SECTION 4. Standard of service. — A lawyer shall observe thesame standard of service for all clients, regardless of remuneration,except for the higher standard required for representation of vulnerablepersons. 

CANON VI

ACCOUNTABILITYBy taking the Lawyer’s Oath, a lawyer becomes a guardian of the law and anadministrator of justice. As such, the lawyer shall observe the highest degree ofmorality, adhere to rigid standards of mental fitness, and faithfully comply with therules of the legal profession.Failure to honor this covenant makes the lawyer unfit to continue in thepractice of law and accountable to society, the courts, the legal profession, and theclient.

SECTION 1. Nature of disciplinary proceedings againstlawyers. — Disciplinary proceedings against lawyers shall beconfidential in character and summary in nature.Nonetheless, the final order of the Supreme Court shall bepublished like its decisions in other cases.

SECTION 2. How instituted. — Proceedings for thedisbarment, suspension, or discipline of lawyers may be commencedby the Supreme Court on its own initiative, or upon the filing of averified complaint by the Board of Governors of the IBP, or by anyperson, before the Supreme Court or the IBP. However, a verifiedcomplaint against a government lawyer which seeks to discipline suchlawyer as a member of the Bar shall only be filed in the Supreme Court.A verified complaint filed with the Supreme Court may bereferred to the IBP for investigation, report and recommendation,except when filed directly by the IBP, in which case, the verifiedcomplaint shall be referred to the Office of the Bar Confidant or suchfact-finding body as may be designated.Complaints for disbarment, suspension and discipline filedagainst incumbent Justices of the Court of Appeals, Sandiganbayan,Court of Tax Appeals and judges of lower courts, or against lawyers inthe judicial service, whether they are charged singly or jointly withother respondents, and whether such complaint deals with actsunrelated to the discharge of their official functions, shall be forwardedby the IBP to the Supreme Court for appropriate disposition under Rule140, as amended.

SECTION 3. Contents of the complaint. — The complaint shallbe verified. It shall state clearly and concisely the acts or omissionscomplained of and shall be supported by judicial affidavits of thewitnesses and such other documents in support thereof.If the verified complaint is filed before the IBP, six (6) copiesthereof shall be filed with the Secretary of the IBP or the Secretary ofany of its chapters, who shall forthwith transmit the same to the IBPBoard of Governors.

SECTION 4. List of Investigating Commissioners;qualifications. — The IBP shall recommend to the Supreme Court onehundred fifty (150) lawyers in good standing and repute, whom the IBPshall proportionately select from its nine (9) regions. The IBP mayperiodically recommend the adjustment of the number of InvestigatingCommissioners to the Supreme Court according to the existingcaseload.

The list, with the curriculum vitae of the recommended lawyers, shall be submitted by the IBP within a month from the effectivity of the Code.Only those approved by the Supreme Court may be designated as Investigating Commissioners, who shall serve for a term of three (3) years, unless sooner removed, replaced or resigned.An updated list shall be submitted by the IBP to the Supreme Court upon removal, replacement, or resignation of a lawyer previously designated as Investigating Commissioner by the Supreme Court.All approved Investigating Commissioners shall take an oath of office in the form prescribed by the IBP. A copy of the Investigating Commissioner’s appointment and oath shall be transmitted to the Supreme Court.

SECTION 5. Assignment by raffle of InvestigatingCommissioner. — The IBP Board of Governors shall assign by rafflean Investigating Commissioner from among the lawyers approved bythe Supreme Court in the list submitted by the IBP or, when specialcircumstances so warrant, a panel of three (3) InvestigatingCommissioners, to investigate the complaint.

SECTION 6. Complaint against a government lawyer. —When a complaint is filed against a government lawyer, theInvestigating Commissioner shall determine, within five (5) calendardays from assignment by raffle, whether the concerned agency, theOmbudsman, or the Supreme Court has jurisdiction. If the allegationsin the complaint touch upon the lawyer’s continuing obligations underthe CPRA or if the allegations, assuming them to be true, make thelawyer unfit to practice the profession, then the InvestigatingCommissioner shall proceed with the case. Otherwise, the InvestigatingCommissioner shall recommend that the complaint be dismissed.

SECTION 7. Disqualification of Investigating Commissioner.— An Investigating Commissioner shall, on his or her own initiative orupon motion, recuse from acting as such on the grounds of relationshipwithin the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity with any of theparties or their counsel, professional legal relationship, pecuniaryinterest, or where he or she has acted as counsel] for either party, unless,in the last instance, the parties sign and enter upon the record theirwritten consent.Where an Investigating Commissioner does not disqualifyhimself or herself, a party may file the appropriate motion fordisqualification before the IBP Board of Governors. The IBP Board ofGovernors shall resolve the motion within five (5) calendar days fromreceipt thereof. Upon vote of majority of the members present, therebeing a quorum, the IBP Board of Governors shall order thedisqualification and designate a replace of the disqualified InvestigatingCommissioner. The decision of the IBP Board of Governors on thedisqualification shall be final.

SECTION 8. Duties of the Investigating Commissioner. — TheInvestigating Commissioner shall investigate a complaint against anymember of the Integrated Bar, and thereafter submit a report embodyingthe recommended action to the IBP Board of Governors, within a totalperiod not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) calendar days, fromassignment by raffle.

SECTION 9. Submissions allowed; verification. — The onlysubmissions allowed are the complaint, answer, and position papers, allof which shall be verified.A Certificate of Non-Forum Shopping shall accompany theverified complaint.An unverified complaint shall be recommended for outrightdismissal. = An unverified answer or position paper shall not beconsidered.

SECTION 10. Prohibited submissions. — The followingsubmissions are prohibited:(a) Motion to dismiss the complaint or petition, except on theground of lack of jurisdiction, litis pendentia or resJudicata,(by Motion for a bill of particulars;(¢) Motion to reopen or for new trial;(d) Petition for relief from judgment;(e) Supplemental pleadings;(f) Motion for reconsideration of a judgment on the merits,except a motion for reconsideration of an interlocutoryorder or resolution.

SECTION 11. Lack of prima facie showing of liability;outright dismissal. — Within fifteen (15) calendar days fromassignment by raffle, if the Investigating Commissioner finds no primafacie showing of liability, the Investigating Commissioner shallrecommend the outright dismissal of the complaint to the SupremeCourt. The Supreme Court may adopt the recommendation and dismissthe complaint outright. Otherwise, the Supreme Court shall direct theInvestigating Commissioner to conduct further proceedings.

SECTION 12. Effect of death of lawyer on administrativedisciplinary cases. — Disciplinary proceedings may not be institutedagainst a lawyer who has died. If such proceedings have been institutednotwithstanding the lawyer’s death, the administrative case against saidlawyer shall be dismissed.The death of the lawyer during the pendency of the case shallcause its dismissal.

SECTION 13. Issuance of summons. — Within fifteen (15)calendar days from assignment by raffle, the InvestigatingCommissioner shall issue the required summons, attaching thereto acopy of the verified complaint and supporting documents, if any. ‘Thesummons shall require the respondent to file a verified answer.

SECTION 14. Verified answer. — The answer shall be verifiedand filed within thirty (30) calendar days from receipt of the summons.The verified answer shall be accompanied by judicial affidavits of thewitnesses and such other documents in support thereof.The respondent may, upon motion, for good cause, be given oneextension of fifteen (15) calendar days to file the verified answer.Two (2) copies of the verified answer shall be filed with theInvestigating Commissioner, with proof of service on the complainantor the latter’s counsel.

SECTION 15. Dismissal after answer. —- If the InvestigatingCommissioner finds that the complaint is not meritorious based on theverified answer, the Investigating Commissioner shall recommend tothe Supreme Court the dismissal of the complaint. Otherwise, the Supreme Court shall direct the Investigating Commissioner to conductfurther proceedings.

SECTION 16. Irrelevance. of desistance, settlement,compromise, restitution, withdrawal, or failure to prosecute. — Noinvestigation shall be interrupted or terminated by reason of thedesistance, settlement, compromise, restitution, withdrawal of thecharges, or failure of the complainant to prosecute the same.

SECTION 17. Counsel de officio. — The IBP Board ofGovernors shall appoint a suitable member of the Integrated Bar ascounsel de officio to assist the complainant or the respondent during theinvestigation in case of need for such assistance.

SECTION 18. Investigation. — Upon joinder of issues or uponfailure of the respondent to answer, the Investigating Commissionershall proceed with the investigation of the case. However, if despitereasonable notice, the respondent fails to file an answer or appear, theinvestigation shall proceed ex parte. In both instances, the investigationshall proceed with dispatch.The respondent shall be given full opportunity to defend and beheard, whether through counsel or not, and to present witnesses.The Investigating Commissioner shall have the power to issuesubpoenae and administer oaths and affirmations in relation to theconduct of the proceedings.

SECTION 19. Indirect contempt. -— Willful failure or refusalto obey a subpoena or any other lawful order issued by the InvestigatingCommissioner shall be dealt with as indirect contempt of court. TheInvestigating Commissioner shall require the alleged contemnor toshow cause within ten (10) calendar days from notice. Upon receipt ofthe compliance or lapse of the period to comply, the InvestigatingCommissioner may conduct a hearing, if necessary, in accordance withthe procedure set forth under Canon VI, Section 22 for hearings beforethe Investigating Commissioner. Such hearing shall be terminatedwithin fifteen (15) calendar days from commencement. Thereafter, theInvestigating Commissioner shall submit a report and recommendationto the IBP Board of Governors within a period of fifteen (15) calendardays from termination of the contempt hearing.Within thirty (30) calendar days from receipt of the InvestigatingCommissioner’s report and recommendation on the contempt charge,the IBP Board of Governors, through a Resolution, may either adopt, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the InvestigatingCommissioner. The action of the IBP Board of Governors shall beimmediately executoty.The action of the IBP Board of Governors may be appealed tothe Supreme Court. The execution of the order of contempt shall notbe suspended, unless a bond is filed by the person adjudged incontempt, in an amount fixed by the IBP Board of Governors,conditioned upon compliance with and performance of the final actionin the contempt case, if decided against the contemnor.

SECTION 20. Submission of preliminary conference briefs. —Immediately upon receipt of the verified answer, the InvestigatingCommissioner shall send a notice to the parties and counsels tosimultaneously file, within a non-extendible period of ten (10) calendardays from receipt of the notice, their respective preliminary conferencebriefs which shall contain the following:(a) Admissions;(b) Stipulation of facts;(¢) Definition of issues;(d) Judicial affidavits and marked exhibits, accompanied bythe lawyer’s certification that the attached documents arethe genuine or faithful reproductions of the original in hisor her custody or possession;(e) Such other matters as may aid in the prompt disposition ofthe action.

SECTION 21. Preliminary conference order; position papers.— Within ten (10) calendar days from receipt of the preliminaryconference briefs, the Investigating Commissioner shall issue aPreliminary Conference Order, on the basis of such briefs submitted bythe parties and counsels, summarizing the stipulated facts, issues andmarked exhibits.The Investigating Commissioner shall further direct the partiesto submit their verified position papers within a non-extendible periodof ten (10) calendar days from receipt of the preliminary conferenceorder.

SECTION 22. Clarificatory hearing. — Within ten (10)calendar days from receipt of the last position paper, the InvestigatingCommissioner shall determine whether there is a need to conduct ahearing to clarify factual issues and confront witnesses.If deemed necessary, the Investigating Commissioner shall setthe hearing within fifteen (15) calendar days from such determination,and identify the factual issues to be made subject of the hearing.The Investigating Commissioner may subpoena any witness toappear at the hearing to answer clarificatory questions. Thereafter, theInvestigating Commissioner may allow the parties to confront thewitnesses and propound their own clarificatory questions on the factualissues identified by the Investigating Commissioner.The clarificatory hearing may be done in-person or throughvideoconferencing. If it is conducted in-person, the clarificatoryhearing shall be done at the most convenient venue for the parties.The clarificatory hearing shall be terminated within thirty (30)calendar days from its commencement.

SECTION 23. Minutes of proceedings. — The proceedingsbefore the IBP shall be recorded.

SECTION 24. Non-appearance of parties. — Non-appearanceat the clarificatory hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right toparticipate therein.

SECTION 25. Issuance of report and recommendation by theInvestigating Commissioner. — If there is no clarificatory hearing, theInvestigating Commissioner shall render a report and recommendationand submit the same to the IBP Board of Governors within a non-extendible period of sixty (60) calendar days from receipt of the lastposition paper or lapse of the period given.In case the Investigating Commissioner sets a clarificatoryhearing, the report and recommendation shall be rendered andsubmitted to the IBP Board of Governors within a non-extendibleperiod of thirty (30) calendar days from the termination of the hearing.The report and recommendation shall be accompanied by theduly certified transcript of stenographic notes, or in lieu thereof, theaudio recording, if any, or the Investigating Commissioner’s personal notes duly signed, which should be attached to the records, togetherwith the evidence presented during the investigation. The submissionof the report need not await the transcription of the stenographic notes,it being sufficient that the report reproduce substantially from theInvestigating Commissioner’s personal notes any relevant and pertinenttestimonies.If the hearing is conducted through videoconferencing, theproceedings shall be recorded by the Investigating Commissioner. Itshall form part of the records of the case, appending thereto relevantelectronic documents taken up or issued during the hearing.

SECTION 26. Submission of resolution by the Board ofGovernors. — The IBP Board of Governors shall have a non-extendibleperiod of ninety (90) calendar days from receipt of the Report andRecommendation of the Investigating Commissioner, within which tosubmit to the Supreme Court its Resolution adopting, modifying ordisapproving such Report and Recommendation.

SECTION 27. Depositions. — Depositions may be taken inaccordance with the Rules of Civil Procedure, as amended, with leaveof the Investigating Commissioner.

SECTION 28. Filing and service. — The filing and the serviceof papers or notices required by this Canon shall be made with theCommission, or upon the parties personally, by registered mail,accredited courier, electronic mail or other electronic means, or asprovided for in international conventions to which the Philippines is a party.For this purpose, the office address and the electronic mailaddress supplied by the lawyer to the IBP shall be the official addressesto which all notices, orders and processes shall be served.Proof of filing and service shall be submitted in accordance withthe Rules of Civil Procedure, as amended.

SECTION 29. Substantial defects; motion to reopen. — Anysubstantial defect in the complaint, notice, answer, or in the proceedingor the Investigating Commissioner’s Report which may result in themiscarriage of justice may be raised as an error before the SupremeCourt, unless the defect results in the deprivation of the right to dueprocess. In case of the latter, the matter may be brought before the IBPBoard of Governors by way of a motion to reopen within sixty (60)calendar days from knowledge.

SECTION 30. Proceedings initiated before the Supreme Court.— In proceedings initiated by the Supreme Court, or proceedingscommenced by complaint filed with the Supreme Court, the SupremeCourt may refer the case for investigation, report and recommendationto the Office of the Bar Confidant, or the IBP, or other fact-finding bodythat is designated or created by the Supreme Court for such purpose.Cases referred to the Office of the Bar Confidant, or other fact-finding body, or the IBP shall proceed in the same manner provided inSections 5 to 29 of this Canon.In any event, the report and recommendation on the investigationshall be reviewed directly by the Supreme Court, which shall take suchnecessary action on the report and recommendation as may bewarranted.

SECTION 31. Preventive suspension. — After receipt ofrespondent’s answer or lapse of the period therefor, the Supreme Court,on its own initiative, or upon the recommendation of the IBP Board ofGovernors, the Office of the Bar Confidant, or the fact-finding bodyreferred to in Section 30, may suspend a lawyer from the practice oflaw during the pendency of the investigation for a period not exceedingone hundred eighty (180) calendar days or until such suspension islified by the Supreme Court, in order to prevent interference with orobstruction of the investigation, tampering, concealment or destructionof evidence, intimidating or exerting undue influence on any witness.

SECTION 32. Quantum and burden of proof. — Inadministrative disciplinary cases, the complainant has the burden ofproof to establish with substantial evidence the allegations against therespondent. Substantial evidence is that amount of relevant evidencewhich a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to justify aconclusion.

SECTION 33. Serious offenses. — Serious offenses include:(a) Gross misconduct, or any inexcusable, shameful orflagrant unlawful conduct;(b) Serious dishonesty, fraud, or deceit, including falsificationof documents and making untruthful statements;(c) Bribery or corruption;(d) Gross negligence in the performance of duty, or conductthat is reckless and inexcusable, which results in the clientbeing deprived of his or her day in court;(e) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude;(f)  Grossly immoral conduct, or an act that is so corrupt orfalse as to constitute a criminal act, or so immoral as to bereprehensible to a high degree;(2) Misappropriating a client’s funds or properties;(h) Gross ignorance of the law or procedure, or the disregardof basic rules and settled jurisprudence, when either isattended by bad faith, malice, or corrupt motive;(i)  Grossly undignified conduct prejudicial to theadministration of justice;(j) Sexual abuse;(k)  Gender-based sexual harassment or discrimination;(I) Open defiance to any order of the court, tribunal, or othergovernment agency,(m) Threat of physical or economic harm, amounting to acrime, directed at a fellow lawyer, the latter's client orprincipal, a witness, or any official or employee of a court,tribunal, or other government agency;(n) Willful and deliberate forum shopping, and forumshopping through gross negligence;(0) Intentional violation of the rule on privilegedcommunication;(p) Violation of the notarial rules, except reportorialrequirements, when attended by bad faith;(q) Intentional violation of the conflict of interest rules;(r)  Influence-peddling or using one’s relationships to obtain afavorable action on, or outcome in, any pending matter orproceeding, directly or indirectly, with or withoutmonetary consideration, from any officer of a court,tribunal or other government agency;(s) Unlawful discrimination under Canon V; and(t) Sale, distribution, possession and/or use of illegal drugs orsubstances.

SECTION 34. Less serious offenses. — Less serious offensesinclude:(a) Simple misconduct, or such misconduct without themanifest elements of corruption, clear intent to violate thelaw or flagrant disregard of established rules;(b) Simple negligence in the performance of duty, or suchnegligence which does not result in depriving the client ofhis or her day in court;(¢) Violation of Supreme Court rules and issuances in relationto Bar Matters and administrative disciplinaryproceedings, including willful and deliberate disobedienceof the orders of the Supreme Court and the IBP;(d) Simple dishonesty;(e) Other violations of the conflict of interest rules;(f) Prohibited borrowing of money from a client;(g) Prohibited lending of money;(h) Other unlawful threats;(i)  Instituting frivolous or baseless actions, on the basis of afinal decision or order dismissing such action for beingfrivolous or baseless;(j) Violation of the sub judice rule;Deliberate failure or refusal to pay just debts;Termination of legal services absent good cause andwritten notice;Use of intemperate or offensive language before any court,tribunal, or other government agency,Unjustifiable failure or refusal to render an accounting ofthe funds or properties of a client;Unauthorized division of fees with a non-lawyer; andOther violations of reportorial requirements.

SECTION 35. Light offenses. — Light offenses include:a Violation of IBP rules and issuances governingb membership in the IBP;c Use of vulgar or offensive language in personal dealings;d Fraternizing with the officials or employees of a court,tribunal, or other government agency where therespondent has a pending case or cases, to such a degreeand frequency as would give the appearance of power orinfluence over them, or which tends to create animpression of impropriety;e Filing of frivolous motions for inhibition;f Failure to promptly call upon client to rectify a fraudulentact; org Other similar or analogous infractions of the CPRA.

SECTION 36. Assisting in the commission of an offense. —Any lawyer who shall knowingly assist another lawyer in thecommission of any serious, less serious, or light offense punished bythe CPRA may also be held liable.

SECTION 37. Sanctions. —(a) If the respondent is found guilty of a serious offense, anyof the following sanctions, or a combination thereof, shallbe imposed:(1) Disbarment;(2) Suspension from the practice of law for a periodexceeding six (6) months;(3) Revocation of notarial commission anddisqualification as notary public for not less thantwo (2) years; or(4) A fine exceeding P100,000.00.(b) If the respondent is found guilty of a less serious offense,any of the following sanctions, or a combination thereof,shall be imposed:(1) Suspension from the practice of law for a periodwithin the range of one (1) month to six (6) months,or revocation of notarial commission anddisqualification as notary public for less than two(2) years;(2) A fine within the range of P35,000.00 toP100,000.00.(c) If the respondent is found guilty of a light offense, any ofthe following sanctions shall be imposed:(1) A fine within the range of P1,000.00 to P35,000.00;(2) Censure; or(3) Reprimand.In addition to the above sanctions in paragraph (c),the respondent may also be required to docommunity service or service in the IBP legal aidprogram."In all instances, when the offense involves money or propertyowed, which is intrinsically linked to the lawyer-client relationship, therespondent shall be ordered to return the same.

SECTION 38. Modifying circumstances. — In determining theappropriate penalty to be imposed, the Court may, in its discretion,appreciate the following mitigating and aggravating circumstances:(a) Mitigating circumstances:(1) First offense, except in charges of grossmisconduct, bribery or corruption, grossly immoralconduct, misappropriating a client’s funds orproperties, sexual abuse, and sale, distribution,possession and/or use of illegal drugs or substances;(2) Absence of bad faith or malice;(3) Return of the amounts owed;(4) Expression of remorse;(5) Reconciliation with the complainant;(6) Rectification of wrongdoing;(7) Act or omission did not prejudice the client;(8) Age;(9) Number of years in the practice of law;(10) Humanitarian considerations; and(11) Other analogous circumstances.(b)  Aggravating Circumstances:(1) Finding of previous administrative liability where apenalty is imposed, regardless of nature or gravity;(2) Age;(3) Number of years in the practice of law;(4) Employment of fraudulent means to conceal theoffense;(5) Respondent’s act or omission was tainted with badfaith or malice, except when it is an element of theoffense;(6) Lack of remorse;(7) Failure to comply with the orders of the Court andthe IBP in relation to an administrative case; and(8) Other analogous circumstances.

SECTION 39. Manner of imposition. — If one (1) or moreaggravating circumstances and no mitigating circumstances are present,the Supreme Court may impose the penalties of suspension or fine fora period or amount not exceeding double of the maximum prescribedunder this Rule. The Supreme Court may, in its discretion, impose thepenalty of disbarment depending on the number and gravity of theaggravating circumstances.If one (1) or more mitigating circumstances and no aggravatingcircumstances are present, the Supreme Court may impose the penaltiesof suspensicn or fine for a period or amount not less than half of theminimum prescribed under the CPRA.If there are both aggravating and mitigating circumstancespresent, the Supreme Court may offset each other.

SECTION 40. Penalty for multiple offenses. — If therespondent is found liable for more than one (1) offense arising fromseparate acts or omissions in a single administrative proceeding, theCourt shall impose separate penalties for each offense. Should theaggregate of the imposed penalties exceed five (5) years of suspensionfrom the practice of law or P1,000,000.00 in fines, the respondent may,in the discretion of the Supreme Court, be meted with the penalty ofdisbarment.If a single act or omission gives rise to more than one (1) offense,the respondent shall still be found liable for all such offenses, but shall,nonetheless, only be meted with the appropriate penalty for the mostserious offense.

SECTION 41. Payment of fines and return of client’s moneyand property. — When the penalty imposed is a fine or the respondentis ordered to return the client’s money or property, the respondent shallpay or return it within a period not exceeding three (3) months fromreceipt of the decision or resolution. If unpaid or unreturned, the Courtmay cite the respondent in indirect contempt,

SECTION 42. Penalty when the respondent has beenpreviously disbarred. — When the respondent has been previouslydisbarred and is subsequently found guilty of a new charge, the Courtmay impose a fine or order the disbarred lawyer to return the money orproperty to the client, when proper. If the new charge deserves thepenalty of a disbarment or suspension from the practice of law, it shallnot be imposed but the penalty shall be recorded in the personal file ofthe disbarred lawyer in the Office of the Bar Confidant or other officedesignated for the purpose. In the event that the disbarred lawyerapplies for judicial clemency, the penalty so recorded shall beconsidered in the resolution of the same.

SECTION 43. Immediately executory; furnished copies. —The decision or resolution pronouncing the respondent’s administrativeliability is immediately executory. The copies of the decision orresolution shall be furnished to the Office of the Bar Confidant, the IBPNational Office and local chapter to which the respondent belongs, andthe Office of the Court Administrator for circulation to all the courts.

SECTION 44. Confidentiality. — Proceedings against lawyersshall be confidential. However, the final order of the Supreme Courtshall be published like its decisions in other cases.

SECTION 45. Sworn statement after service of suspension. —Upon the expiration of the period of suspension from the practice oflaw, the lawyer shall file a Sworn Statement with the Supreme Court,through the Office of the Bar Confidant, to show that the petitioner,during the period of suspension:(a) has not appeared before any court, tribunal or othergovernment agency, whether in respect of current, formeror prospective clients;(b) has not signed or filed any pleading or other courtsubmission;(c) has duly informed his or her clients, law firm, [aw schoolwhere the lawyer is teaching, legal clinic, or other legalservice organization of which he or she is a member,regarding the suspension; and(d) has not otherwise performed any act, directly or indirectly,that amounts to the practice of law.The Sworn Statement shall state the date of the lawyer’s receiptof the order, decision or resolution imposing the penalty of suspension,as well as a list of the lawyer’s engagements affected by the suspension,indicating the relevant court, tribunal or other government agency, ifany.Copies of the Sworn Statement shall be furnished to the LocalChapter of the IBP, to the Executive Judge of the courts where thesuspended lawyer has pending cases handled by him or her, and/orwhere he or she has appeared as counsel.

SECTION 46. Resumption of practice of law. — The SwornStatement shall be considered as proof of the suspended lawyer’scompliance with the order of suspension. Such lawyer shall be allowedto resume the practice of law upon the filing of the Sworn Statementbefore the Supreme Court.However, any false statement in the Sworn Statement shall be aground for a complaint for disbarment.Within five (5) days from the filing of the Sworn Statement andthe Office of the Bar Confidant determines that there is a false statementstated therein, it shall refer the same to the Court for its immediateaction.

SECTION 47. Reinstatement in the Roll of Attorneys. — Alawyer who has been disbarred may file a verified petition for judicialclemency after five (5) years from the receipt of the order, decision, orresolution of disbarment.

SECTION 48. Petition for judicial clemency. — The verifiedpetition for judicial clemency shall allege the following:(a) that the verified petition was filed after five (5) years fromthe receipt of the order, decision, or resolution ofdisbarment;(b) thatthe disbarred lawyer has fully complied with the termsand conditions of all prior disciplinary orders, includingorders for restitution;(¢) that he or she recognizes the wrongfulness and seriousnessof the misconduct for which he or she was disbarred byshowing positive acts evidencing reformation;(d) that he or she has reconciled, or attempted in good faith toreconcile, with the wronged private offended party in thedisbarment case, or if the same is not possible, anexplanation as to why such attempt at reconciliation couldnot be made.Where there is no private offended party, the plea forclemency must contain a public apology; and(e) notwithstanding the conduct for which the disbarredlawyer was disciplined, he or she has the requisite goodmoral character and competence.Any of the following allegations may also be made in support ofthe petition:(a) that he or she still has productive years that can be put togood use if given a chance; or(b) there is a showing of promise (such as intellectualaptitude, learning or legal acumen or contribution to legalscholarship and the development of the legal system oradministrative and other relevant skills), as well aspotential for public service.

SECTION 49. Action on the petition for judicial clemency;prima facie merit. — Upon receipt of the petition, the Supreme Courtshall conduct a preliminary evaluation and determine if the same hasprima facie merit based on the criteria.If the petition has prima facie merit, the Supreme Court shallrefer the petition to the Office of the Bar Confidant or any fact-finding body the Court so designates for investigation, report andrecommendation.If the petition fails to show any prima facie merit, it shall bedenied outright.

SECTION 50. Investigation by the Office of the Bar Confidantor other fact-finding body. — The Office of the Bar Confidant or anyother fact-finding body designated shall conduct and terminate theinvestigation and submit to the Supreme Court its report andrecommendation within ninety (90) calendar days from receipt of thereferral.

SECTION 51. Decision on the petition for judicial clemency;quantum of evidence. — The Supreme Court shall decide the petitionon the basis of clear and convincing evidence.

SECTION 52. Prohibition against employment of disbarred orsuspended lawyer. — A lawyer who has been disbarred or suspendedshall not be employed or engaged in the practice of law, including theperformance of the following acts:(a) Providing legal consultation or advice;(b) Appearing on behalf of a client in any hearing orproceeding before any court, tribunal, or other governmentagency or office;(c) Appearing as a representative of a client at a deposition orother discovery matter;(d) Negotiating or transacting any legal matter for or on behalfof a client with third parties;(e) Receiving, disbursing, or otherwise handling a client’sfunds;(f) Teaching law subjects in any educational institution; or(g) Acting and being commissioned as a Notary Public.A suspended lawyer shall immediately cease and desist from thepractice of law until the suspension is lifted by the Supreme Court.Any client previously represented by a suspended lawyer mayengage the services of a new lawyer.The disbarment or suspension of a handling lawyer shall notterminate the lawyer-client engagement between the client and the lawfirm, unless the client chooses otherwise.

SECTION 53. Costs. — All reasonable and necessary expensesincurred in relation to disciplinary and disbarment proceedings arelawful charges for which the parties may be taxed as costs, subject toproof.REVISED LAWYER'S OATHI, (name), do solemnly swear (affirm) that I accept the honor,privilege, duty, and responsibility of practicing law in the Philippinesas an Officer of the Court in the interest of our people.I declare fealty to the Constitution of the Republic of Philippines.In doing so, I shall work towards promoting the rule of law anda regime of truth, justice, freedom, love, equality, and peace.I shall conscientiously and courageously work for justice, as wellas safeguard the rights and meaningful freedoms of all persons,identities and communities. I shall ensure greater and equitable accessto justice. I shall do no falsehood nor shall I pervert the law to unjustlyfavor nor prejudice anyone. I shall faithfully discharge these duties andresponsibilities to the best of my ability, with integrity, and utmostcivility. I impose all these upon myself without mental reservation norpurpose of evasion.So help me, God.GENERAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 1. Transitory provision. — The CPRA shall beapplied to all pending and future cases, except to the extent that in theopinion of the Supreme Court, its retroactive application would not be feasible or would work injustice, in which case the procedure underwhich the cases were filed shall govern.

SECTION 2. Repealing clause. — The Code of ProfessionalResponsibility of 1988, Sections 20 to 37 of Rule 138, and Rule 139-Bof the Rules of Court are repealed.The Lawyer’s Oath, as found in Rule 138 of the Rules of Court,is amended and superseded.Any resolution, circular, bar matter, or administrative orderissued by or principles established in the decisions of the SupremeCourt inconsistent with the CPRA are deemed modified or repealed.

SECTION 3. Effectivity clause. — The CPRA shall take effectfifteen (15) calendar days after its publication in the Official Gazette orany newspaper of general circulation.