CANON 1

INDEPENDENCE
The Independence of a lawyer in the discharge of professional duties without any improper influence, restriction, pressure, or interference, direct or indirect, ensures effective legal representation and is ultimately imperative for the rule of law.

SECTION 1. Independent, accessible, efficient, and effective legal service. — A lawyer shall make legal services accessible in an efficient and effective manner. In performing this duty, a lawyer shall maintain independence, act with integrity, and at all times ensure the efficient and effective delivery of justice.

SECTION 2. Merit-based practice. — A lawyer shall rely solely on the merits of a cause and not exert, or give the appearance of, any influence on, nor undermine the authority of, the court, tribunal or other government agency, or its proceedings.

SECTION 3. Freedom from improper considerations and external influences. — A lawyer shall not, in advocating a client’s cause, be influenced by dishonest or immoral considerations, external influences, or pressure.

SECTION 4. Non-interference by a lawyer. — Unless authorized by law or a court, a lawyer shall not assist or cause a branch, agency, office or officer of the government to interfere in any matter before any court, tribunal, or other government agency.

SECTION 5. Lawyer’s duty and discretion in procedure. — A lawyer shall not allow the client to dictate or determine the procedure in handling the case. Nevertheless, a lawyer shall respect the client’s decision to settle or compromise the case after explaining its consequences to the client.

CANON 2 
PROPRIETY
A lawyer shall, at all times, act with propriety and maintain the appearance of propriety in personal and professional dealings, observe honesty, respect and courtesy, and uphold the dignity of the legal profession consistent with the highest standards of ethical behavior.

SECTION 1. Proper conduct. — A lawyer shall not engage in unlawful, dishonest, immoral, or deceitful conduct.

SECTION 2. Dignified conduct. — A lawyer shall respect the law, the courts, tribunals, and other government agencies, their officials, employees, and processes, and act with courtesy, civility, fairness, and candor towards fellow members of the bar. A lawyer shall not engage in conduct that adversely reflects on one’s fitness to practice law, nor behave in a scandalous manner, whether in public or private life, to the discredit of the legal profession.

SECTION 3. Safe environment; avoid all forms of abuse or harassment. — A lawyer shall not create or promote an unsafe or hostile environment, both in private and public settings, whether online, in workplaces, educational or training institutions, or in recreational areas.To this end, a lawyer shall not commit any form of physical, sexual, psychological, or economic abuse or violence against another person. A lawyer is also prohibited from engaging in any gender-based harassment or discrimination.

SECTION 4. Use of dignified, gender-fair, and child- andculturally-sensitive language. —- A lawyer shall use only dignified,gender-fair, child- and culturally-sensitive language in all personal andprofessional dealings.To this end, a lawyer shall not use language which is abusive,intemperate, offensive or otherwise improper, oral or written, andwhether made through traditional or electronic means, including allforms or types of mass or social media.

SECTION 5. Observance of fairness and obedience. — Alawyer shall, in every personal and professional engagement, insist onthe observance of the principles of fairness and obedience to the law.

SECTION 6. Harassing or threatening conduct. — A lawyershall not harass or threaten a fellow lawyer, the latter’s client orprincipal, a witness, or any official or employee of a court, tribunal, orother government agency. 

SECTION 7. Formal decorum and appearance. — A lawyershall observe formal decorum before all courts, tribunals, and othergovernment agencies.A lawyer’s attire shall be consistent with the dignity of the court,tribunal, or other government agency, with due respect to the person’ssexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression.

SECTION 8. Prohibition against misleading the court,tribunal, or other government agency. — A lawyer shall not misquote,misrepresent, or mislead the court as to the existence or the contents ofany document, argument, evidence, law, or other legal authority, or passoff as one’s own the ideas or words of another, or assert as a fact thatwhich has not been proven.

SECTION 9. Qbstructing access to evidence or altering,destroying, or concealing evidence. — A lawyer shall not obstructanother lawyer’s access to evidence during trial, including testimonialevidence, or alter, destroy, or conceal evidence.

SECTION 10. Conduct in the presentation of a witness. — Alawyer shall avoid all forms of impropriety when presenting orconfronting a witness.A lawyer shall not coach, abuse, discriminate against, or harassany witness, in or out of the court, tribunal, or other governmentagency, or talk to a witness during a break or recess in the trial, while awitness is still under examination. Neither shall a lawyer direct, assist,or abet any misrepresentation or falsehood by a witness.

SECTION 11. False representations or statements; duty tocorrect, — A lawyer shall not make false representations or statements.A lawyer shall be liable for any material damage caused by such falserepresentations or statements.A lawyer shall not, in demand letters or other similarcorrespondence, make false representations or statements, or imputecivil, criminal, or administrative liability, without factual or legal basis.A lawyer shall correct false or inaccurate statements andinformation made in relation to an application for admission to the bar,any pleading, or any other document required by or submitted to thecourt, tribunal or agency, as soon as its falsity or inaccuracy isdiscovered or made known to him or her.

SECTION 12. Duty to report dishonest, deceitful, ormisleading conduct. --- A \awyer shall immediately inform a court,tribunal, or other government agency of any dishonest, deceitful ormisleading conduct related to a matter being handled by said lawyerbefore such court, tribunal, or other government agency.A lawyer shall also report to the appropriate authority anytransaction or unlawful activity that is required to be reported underrelevant laws, including the submission of covered and suspicioustransactions under regulatory laws, such as those concerning anti-money laundering. When disclosing or reporting the foregoinginformation to the appropriate court, tribunal, or other governmentagency, the lawyer shall not be deemed to have violated the lawyer’sduty of confidentiality.Any such information shall be treated with strict confidentiality.A baseless report shall be subject to civil, criminal, oradministrative action.

SECTION 13. Imputation of a misconduct, impropriety, orcrime without basis. —~ A lawyer shall not, directly or indirectly,impute to or accuse another lawyer of a misconduct, impropriety, or acrime in the absence of factual or legal basis.Neither shall a lawyer, directly or indirectly, file or cause to befiled, or assist in the filing of frivolous or baseless administrative, civil,or criminal complaints against another lawyer.

SECTION 14. Remedy for grievances; insinuation of impropermotive. —— A lawyer shall submit grievances against any officer of acourt, tribunal, or other government agency only through theappropriate remedy and before the proper authorities.Statements insinuating improper motive on the part of any suchofficer, which are not supported by substantial evidence, shall beground for disciplinary action.

SECTION 15. Improper claim of influence or familiarity. —A lawyer shall observe propriety in all dealings with officers andpersonnel of any court, tribunal, or other government agency, whetherpersonal or professional. Familiarity with such officers and personnelthat will give rise to an appearance of impropriety, influence, or favorshall be avoided.A lawyer shall not make claims of power, influence, orrelationship with any officer of a court, tribunal, or other governmentagency.

SECTION 16. Duty to report life-threatening situations. — Alawyer who has reasonable grounds to believe that a life-threateningsituation is likely to develop in relation to any proceeding in any court,tribunal, or other government agency shall immediately report the sameto the proper authorities.

SECTION 17. Non-solicitation and — impermissibleadvertisement. — A lawyer shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit, orappear to solicit, legal business.A lawyer shall not, directly or indirectly, advertise legal serviceson any platform or media except with the use of dignified, verifiable,and factual information, including biographical data, contact details,fields of practice, services offered, and the like, so as to allow apotential client to make an informed choice. In no case shall thepermissible advertisement be self-laudatory.A lawyer, law firm, or any of their representatives shall not payor give any benefit or consideration to any media practitioner, award-giving body, professional organization, or personality, in anticipationof, or in return for, publicity or recognition, to attract legalrepresentation, service, or retainership.

SECTION 18. Prohibition against self-promotion. — A lawyershall not make public appearances and statements in relation to aterminated case or legal matter for the purpose of self-promotion, self-aggrandizement, or to seek public sympathy.

SECTION 19, Sub-judice rule. — A lawyer shall not use anyforum or medium to comment or publicize opinion pertaining to apending proceeding before any court, tribunal, or other governmentagency that may:(a) cause a pre-judgment, or(b) sway public perception so as to impede, obstruct, orinfluence the decision of such court, tribunal, or othergovernment agency, or which tends to tarnish the court’sor tribunal’s integrity, or(c) impute improper motives against any of its members, or(d) create a widespread perception of guilt or innocencebefore a final decision.

SECTION 20. Disclosure of relationship or connection. — Alawyer shall, at the first available opportunity, formally disclose onrecord the lawyer’s relationship or connection with the presiding officerof any court, tribunal, or other government agency, or any of itspersonnel, or the lawyer’s partners, associates, or clients, that may serveas a ground for mandatory inhibition in any pending proceeding beforesuch court, tribunal, or other government agency.

SECTION 21. Prohibition against gift-giving and donations.—— A lawyer shall not, directly or indirectly, give gifts, donations,contributions of any value or sort, on any occasion, to any court,tribunal or government agency, or any of its officers and personnel.

SECTION 22. No undue advantage of ignorance of the law. —A lawyer shall not take advantage of a non-lawyer’s lack of educationor knowledge of the law.

SECTION 23. Instituting multiple cases; forum shopping. —A lawyer shall not knowingly engage or through gross negligence inforum shopping, which offends against the administration of justice,and is a falsehood foisted upon the court, tribunal, or other governmentagency.A lawyer shall not institute or advise the client to institutemultiple cases to gain leverage in a case, to harass a party, to delay theproceedings, or to increase the cost of litigation.

SECTION 24. Encroaching or interfering in another lawyer’sengagement; exception. —- A lawyer shall not, directly or indirectly,encroach upon or interfere in the professional engagement of anotherlawyer.This includes a lawyer’s attempt to communicate, negotiate, ordeal with the person represented by another lawyer on any matter,whether pending or not in any court, tribunal, body, or agency, unlesswhen initiated by the client or with the knowledge of the latter’s lawyer.A lawyer, however, may give proper advice and assistance toanyone seeking relief against perceived unfaithful or neglectful counselbased on the Code.

SECTION 25. Responsibility of a solo practitioner. — Alawyer in solo practice shall ensure that all matters requiring suchlawyer’s professional skill and judgment are promptly and competentlyaddressed.

SECTION 26. Definition of a law firm; choice of firm name.— A law firm is any private office, partnership, or association,exclusively comprised of a lawyer or lawyers engaged to practice law,and who hold themselves out as such to the public.In the choice of a firm name, no false, misleading, or assumedname shall be used. The continued use of the name of a deceased,incapacitated, or retired partner is permissible provided that the firmindicates in all its communications that said partner is deceased,incapacitated, or retired.

SECTION 27. Partner who assumes public office. —- When apartner assumes public office, such partner shall withdraw from thefirm and such partner’s name shall be removed from the firm name,unless allowed by law to practice concurrently.

SECTION 28. Dignified government service. — Lawyers ingovernment service shall observe the standard of conduct under theCPRA, the Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Public Officialsand Employees, and other related laws and issuances in theperformance of their duties.Any violation of the CPRA by lawyers in government serviceshall be subject to disciplinary action, separate and distinct fromliability under pertinent laws or rules.

SECTION 29. Lawyers formerly in government service. — Alawyer who has left government service shall not engage in privatepractice pertaining to any matter before the office where he or she usedto be connected within a period of one (1) year from his or herseparation from such office. Justices, judges, clerks of court, city,provincial, and regional prosecutors shall not appear before any courtwithin. the territorial jurisdiction where they previously served withinthe same period.After leaving government service, a lawyer shall not accept anengagement which could improperly influence the outcome of theproceedings which the lawyer handled or intervened in, or over whichthe lawyer previously exercised authority, while in said service.

SECTION 30. No financial interest in transactions; no gifts.— A lawyer in government shal! not, directly or indirectly, promote oradvance his or her private or financial interest or that of another, in anytransaction requiring the approval of his or her office. Neither shallsuch lawyer solicit gifts or receive anything of value in relation to suchinterest.Such lawyer in government shall not give anything of value to,or otherwise unduly favor, any person transacting with his or her office,with the expectation of any benefit in return.

SECTION 31. Prosecution of criminal cases. —- The primaryduty of a public prosecutor is not to convict but to see that justice isdone.Suppressing facts, concealing of, tampering with or destroyingevidence, coaching a witness, or offering false testimony is cause fordisciplinary action.The obligations of a public prosecutor shall also be imposed uponlawyers in the private practice who are authorized to prosecute underthe direct supervision and control of the public prosecutor.

SECTION 32. Lawyers in the academe. —~ A lawyer serving asa dean, administrative officer, or faculty member of an educationalinstitution shall at all times adhere to the standards of behavior requiredof members of the legal profession under the CPRA, observingpropriety, respectability, and decorum inside and outside the classroom,and in all media.

SECTION 33. Conflict of interest for lawyers in the academe.— A lawyer serving as a dean, administrative officer, or facultymember of an educational institution shal! disclose to the institution anyadverse interest of a client.Upon discovery of any adverse interest of the lawyer’s clientwhich directly affects any student who is under his or her directsupervision and guidance, the lawyer shall likewise disclose the sameto the institution.

SECTION 34. Paralegal services; lawyer’s responsibility. — Aparalegal is one who performs tasks that require familiarity with legalconcepts, employed or retained by a lawyer, law office, corporation,governmental agency, or other entity for non-diagnostic and non-advisory work in relation to legal matters delegated by such lawyer, lawoffice, corporation, governmental agency, or other entity.A lawyer must direct or supervise a paralegal in the performanceof the latter’s delegated duties.The lawyer’s duty of confidentiality shall also extend to theservices rendered by the paralegal, who is equally bound to keep theprivilege.

SECTION 35. Non-delegable legal tasks. — A lawyer shall notdelegate to or permit a non-lawyer, including a paralegal, to:(a) accept cases on behalf of the lawyer;(b) give legal advice or opinion;(c) act independently without the lawyer’s supervision ordirection;(d) to hold himself or herself out as a lawyer, or be named inassociation with a lawyer in any pleading or submission toany court, tribunal, or other government agency;(e) appear in any court, tribunal, or other government agency,or actively participate in formal legal proceedings onbehalf of a client, except when allowed by the law or rules;(f) conduct negotiations with third parties unless allowed inadministrative agencies, without a lawyer’s supervision ordirection;(g) sign correspondence containing a legal opinion; and(h) perform any of the duties that only lawyers may undertake.These provisions shall not apply to law student practitionersunder Rule 138-A of the Rules of Court.RESPONSIBLE USE OF SOCIAL MEDIAA lawyer shall uphold the dignity of the legal profession in all social mediainteractions in a manner that enhances the people’s confidence in the legal system,as well as promote its responsible use.

SECTION 36. Responsible use. — A lawyer shall have the duty tounderstand the benefits, risks, and ethical implications associated with the useof social media.

SECTION 37. Online posts. —- A lawyer shall ensure that his or heronline posts, whether made in a public or restricted privacy setting that stillholds an audience, uphold the dignity of the legal profession and shield it fromdisrepute, as well as maintain respect for the law.

SECTION 38. Non-posting of false or unverified statements,disinformation. — A lawyer shall not knowingly or maliciously post, share,upload or otherwise disseminate false or unverified statements, claims, orcommit any other act of disinformation.

SECTION 39. Prohibition against fraudulent accounts. — A lawyershall not create, maintain or operate accounts in social media to hide his orher identity for the purpose of circumventing the law or the provisions of theCPRA.

SECTION 40. Non-disclosure of privileged information throughonline posts. — A lawyer shall not reveal, directly or indirectly, in his or heronline posts confidential information obtained from a client or in the courseof, or emanating from, the representation, except when allowed by law or theCPRA.

SECTION 41. Duty to safeguard client confidences in social media.— A lawyer, who uses.a social media account to communicate with any otherperson in relation to client confidences and information, shall exert efforts toprevent the inadvertent or unauthorized disclosure or use of, or unauthorizedaccess to, such an account.

SECTION 42. Prohibition against influence through social media.— A lawyer shall not communicate, whether directly or indirectly, with anofficer of any court, tribunal, or other government agency through socialmedia to influence the latter’s performance of official duties.

SECTION 43. Legal information; legal advice. —- Pursuant to alawyer’s duty to society and the legal profession, a lawyer may providegeneral legal information, including in answer to questions asked, at any fora,through traditional or electronic means, in all forms or types of mass or socialmedia.A lawyer who gives legal advice on a specific set of facts as disclosedby.a potential client in such fora or media dispenses Limited Legal Serviceand shall be bound by all the duties in the CPRA, in relation to such LimitedLegal Service.

SECTION 44, Online posts that could violate conflict of interest. —A lawyer shall exercise prudence in making posts or comments in social mediathat could violate the provisions on conflict of interest under the CPRA.

CANON III
FIDELITY
Fidelity pertains to a lawyer’s duty to uphold the Constitution and the laws ofthe land, to assist in the administration of justice as an officer of the court, and toadvance or defend a client’s cause, with full devotion, genuine interest, and zeal inthe pursuit of truth and justice.

SECTION 1. Practice of law. — The practice of law is therendition of legal service or performance of acts or the application oflaw, legal principles, and judgment, in or out of court, with regard tothe circumstances or objectives of a person or a cause, and pursuant toa lawyer-client relationship or other engagement governed by theCPRA. It includes employment in the public service or private sectorand requires membership in the Philippine bar as qualification.

SECTION 2. The responsible and accountable lawyer. — Alawyer shall uphold the constitution, obey the laws of the land, promoterespect for laws and legal processes, safeguard human rights, and at alltimes advance the honor and integrity of the legal profession.As an officer of the court, a lawyer shall uphold the rule of lawand conscientiously assist in the speedy and efficient administration ofjustice.As an advocate, a lawyer shall represent the client with fidelityand zeal within the bounds of the law and the CPRA.

SECTION 3. Lawyer-client relationship. — A lawyer-clientrelationship is of the highest fiduciary character. As a trust relation, itis essential that the engagement is founded on the confidence reposedby the client on the lawyer. Therefore, a lawyer-client relationship shallarise when the client consciously, voluntarily and in good faith vests alawyer with the client’s confidence for the purpose of rendering legalservices such as providing legal advice or representation, and thelawyer, whether expressly or impliedly, agrees to render such services.

SECTION 4. Authority of lawyer to bind client. — A lawyercan bind a client in a legal engagement only when so authorized througha written agreement. The lawyer, however, cannot compromise aclient’s litigation, or receive anything in discharge of a client’s claim,without a special power of attorney for such purpose.

SECTION 5. Authority of lawyer to appear. — A lawyer ispresumed to be properly authorized to represent any cause in which heor she appears, and no written power of attorney is required to authorizehim or her to appear in court for the client.The court, tribunal, or other government agency may, on its owninitiative or on motion of either party, on just cause, require a lawyer toproduce or prove the authority to appear on behalf of the client.

SECTION 6. Fiduciary duty of a lawyer. — A lawyer shall bemindful of the trust and confidence reposed by the client.To this end, a lawyer shall not abuse or exploit the relationshipwith a client.

SECTION 7. Prohibition against frivolous suits and abuse ofcourt processes. — A lawyer shall not:(a) file or encourage the filing of any suit or proceeding notauthorized by law or jurisprudence and without anyevidentiary support;(b) unduly impede the execution of an order or judgmentwhich is warranted; or(c) abuse court processes.

SECTION 8. Lawyer's duty to encourage settlement. — Alawyer shall encourage the client to avoid, end or settle a controversy,whether pending or not, in order to reach a settlement or a compromiseif the matter can be compromised under the law and will admit of a fairsettlement.To this end, the lawyer shall actively assist the parties and thecourt, tribunal, or other government agency to effect mediation and/ordispute resolution.

SECTION 9. Duty to call client to rectify fraudulent act. — Alawyer who receives information that a client has, in the course of therepresentation, perpetrated a fraud in relation to any matter subject ofthe representation before a court, tribunal, or other government agency,or against any officer thereof, shall promptly call upon the client torectify the same. Such fraudulent act on the part of the client shall be aground for the termination by the lawyer of the engagement.

SECTION 10. Responsibility over a subordinate lawyer,paralegal, or employee. — A lawyer or law firm shall be responsiblefor the mistakes, negligence, and/or acts or omissions of a subordinatelawyer, paralegal, or employee under the lawyer’s direct supervisionand control, who is acting within the scope of the assigned tasks, thatcause damage or injury which brings dishonor to the profession orviolates the rule on confidentiality.However, such liability of the supervising lawyer does not attachupon proof of exercise of diligence of a good parent of a family in theselection and supervision of subordinate lawyer, paralegal, oremployee.

SECTION 11. Responsibility of a supervisory lawyer over asupervised lawyer. — A supervisory lawyer shall co-sign a pleading orother submission to any court, tribunal, or other government agencywith a supervised lawyer. A supervisory lawyer shall be responsible fora violation of the CPRA by the supervised lawyer in any of thefollowing instances:(a) the supervisory lawyer orders or directs the specificconduct or, with knowledge of the specific conduct,ratifies it; or(b) the supervisory lawyer knows of such conduct at a timewhen it could be prevented or its consequences avoided ormitigated, but fails to take reasonable remedial action; or(c) the supervisory lawyer should have known of the conductso that reasonable remedial action could have been takenat a time when the consequences of the conduct could havebeen avoided or mitigated.A supervisory lawyer is a lawyer having direct supervisoryauthority over another lawyer, including a supervising lawyer underRule 138-A of the Rules of Court.

SECTION 12. Responsibilities of a supervised lawyer. — Asupervised lawyer acting under the direction of the supervising lawyer,managing partner, or other partners of the firm is nevertheless boundby the CPRA.

SECTION 13. Conflict of interest. — A lawyer shall notrepresent conflicting interests except by written informed consent of allconcerned given after a full disclosure of the facts.There is conflict of interest when a lawyer represents inconsistentor opposing interests of two or more persons. The test is whether inbehalf of one client it is the lawyer’s duty to fight for an issue or claim,but which is his or her duty to oppose for the other client.

SECTION 14. Prohibition against conflict-of-interestrepresentation; current clients. — In relation to current clients, thefollowing rules shall be observed:(a) A lawyer shall not enter into a business transaction with aclient or knowingly acquire an ownership, possessory,security, or other pecuniary interest adverse to a clientunless:(1) it is shown that the transaction and terms on whichthe lawyer acquires the interest are fair andreasonable to the client and are fully disclosed andtransmitted in writing in a manner that can bereasonably understood by the client;(2) the client is advised in writing of the desirability ofseeking, and is given a reasonable opportunity toseek, the advice of another independent lawyer onthe transaction; and(3) the client gives written informed consent to theessential terms of the transaction and the lawyer's(a) role in the transaction, including whether the lawyeris representing the client in the transaction.(b) A lawyer shall not use confidential information relating torepresentation of a client without the client’s writteninformed consent, except as permitted or required by lawor the CPRA.(c) A lawyer shall not, by undue influence, acquire anysubstantial gift from a client, including a testamentary gift,or prepare on behalf of a client an instrument giving thelawyer such gift, directly or indirectly.(d) Unless with the written informed consent of the client andsubject to the application of the sub judice rule, a lawyershall not make or negotiate an agreement giving the lawyerliterary or media rights to a portrayal or account based insubstantial part on information relating to therepresentation.(e) A lawyer shall not accept compensation for representing aclient from any person other than the client, unless:(1) the client gives written informed consent;(2) there is no interference with the lawyer'sindependence or professional judgment or with thelawyer-client relationship; or(3) the information relating to representation of a clientis protected as required by the rule on privilegedcommunication.(f) A lawyer, who represents two or more clients in the samecase, in case there is a settlement or plea-bargaining, shalldisclose to all the clients the existence and nature of all theclaims or pleas involved and the participation of eachclient in the settlement or plea-bargaining.(g) A lawyer shall avoid testifying in behalf of the client,except: (1) on formal matters, such as the mailing,authentication or custody of an instrument, and thelike; or(2) on substantial matters, in cases where the testimonyis essential to the ends of justice, in which event thelawyer must, during the testimony, entrust the trialof the case to another counsel.

SECTION 15. Conflict of interest of a lawyer hired by a lawfirm. — When a lawyer joins a law firm, it shall be the duty of thelawyer to disclose to the law firm, at the earliest possible opportunity,his or her previous clients that may have a potential conflict of interestwith the current clients of the law firm. If there is a potential conflictof interest, the lawyer shall not act on the case or cases of the affectedcurrent client.

SECTION 16. Prohibition against dating, romantic, or sexualrelations with a client. — A lawyer shall not have dating, romantic, orsexual relations with a client during the engagement, unless theconsensual relationship existed between them before the lawyer-clientrelationship commenced.

SECTION 17. Prohibition against conflict-of-interestrepresentation; prospective clients. — In relation to prospectiveclients, the following rules shall be observed:(a) A lawyer shall, at the earliest opportunity, ascertain theexistence of any conflict of interest between a prospectiveclient and current clients, and immediately disclose thesame if found to exist.In case of an objection by either the prospective orcurrent client, the lawyer shall not accept the newengagement.(b) A lawyer shall maintain the private confidences of aprospective client even if no engagement materializes, andshall not use any such information to further his or her owninterest, or the interest of any current client.

SECTION 18. Prohibition against conflict-of-interestrepresentation; former clients. — In relation to former clients, thefollowing rules shall be observed:(a) A lawyer shall maintain the private confidences of aformer client even after the termination of the engagement,except upon the written informed consent of the formerclient, or as otherwise allowed under the CPRA or otherapplicable laws or regulations, or when the informationhas become generally known.(b) A lawyer shall not use information relating to the formerrepresentation, except as the CPRA or applicable laws andregulations would permit or require with respect to acurrent or prospective client, or when the information hasbecome generally known.(c) Unless the former client gives written informed consent, alawyer who has represented such client in a legal mattershall not thereafter represent a prospective client in thesame or related legal matter, where the prospective client’sinterests are materially adverse to the former client’sinterests.

SECTION 19. Corporate lawyers; conflict of interest. — Inrelation to organizational clients, a lawyer who represents a corporationor any organization does not, by virtue of such representation,necessarily represent any constituent or affiliated organization, such asa parent or subsidiary.A lawyer for a corporation or other organization, who is also amember of its board of directors or trustees, shall determine whetherthe responsibilities of the two roles may conflict. In the event of thelatter, the lawyer shall disclose the conflict of interest to all concernedparties.

SECTION 20. Legal services organization; conflict of interest.— A legal services organization is any private organization, includinga legal aid clinic, partnership, association, or corporation, whoseprimary purpose is to provide free legal services.A lawyer-client relationship shall arise only between the clientand the handling lawyers of the legal services organization. All thelawyers of the legal services organization who participated in thehandling of a legal matter shall be covered by the rule on conflict ofinterest and confidentiality.

SECTION 21. Lawyers in government service; conflict of interest. — A lawyer currently serving in the government shall not practice law privately, unless otherwise authorized by the Constitution,the law or applicable Civil Service rules and regulations. If allowed,private practice shall be upon the express authority of the lawyer'ssuperior, for a stated specified purpose or engagement, and only duringan approved leave of absence. However, the lawyer shall not representan interest adverse to the government.

SECTION 22. Public Attorney’s Office; conflict of interest. —The Public Attorney’s Office is the primary legal aid service office ofthe government. In the pursuit of its mandate under its charter, thePublic Attorney’s Office shall ensure ready access to its services by themarginalized sectors of society in a manner that takes into considerationthe avoidance of potential conflict of interest situations which will leavethese marginalized parties unassisted by counsel.A conflict of interest of any of the lawyers of the PublicAttorney’s Office incident to services rendered for the Office shall beimputed only to the said lawyer and the lawyer’s direct supervisor.Such conflict of interest shall not disqualify the rest of the lawyers fromthe Public Attorney’s Office from representing the affected client, uponfull disclosure to the latter and written informed consent.

SECTION 23. Amicus curiae. — A lawyer shall not decline,without just cause, a request by any court, tribunal, or other governmentagency to act as amicus curiae in any proceeding relating to thelawyer’s expertise or field of specialization.

SECTION 24. Active involvement in legal education. — Alawyer shall keep abreast of legal developments, participate incontinuing legal education programs, and support efforts to achievestandards of excellence in law schools as well as in the practical trainingof law students.In addition, a lawyer shall assist the Integrated Bar of thePhilippines (IBP), law schools, law alumni associations, lawassociations, or civic organizations, in educating the public on the lawand jurisprudence.The IBP Chapters shall provide supervising lawyers to the legalaid clinics in their jurisdiction.

SECTION 25. Support for legal internship, apprenticeship,and training. — To prepare the next generation of lawyers for ethicalpractice, lawyers shall support legal internship and apprenticeship programs and accept law students for training.The lawyer shall treat the apprentices as junior colleagues andfuture counsels, and shall conscientiously supervise them.

SECTION 26. Prompt payment of membership dues. — Alawyer shall promptly pay the annual membership dues in the IBP,unless expressly exempt from such payment by law or rules.

SECTION 27. Confidentiality of privileged communication. —A lawyer shall maintain the confidences of the client, and shall respectdata privacy laws. The duty of confidentiality shall continue even afterthe termination of the lawyer-client engagement.

SECTION 28. Protecting client confidences. — A lawyer shallnot reveal the confidences of the client, including data from the client’sfiles, except;(a) When a written informed consent is obtained from theclient;(b) When required by law, such as anti-money launderingstatutes, or the Rules of Court;(c) To the extent necessary, to collect the lawyer’s fees;(d) In defense of the lawyer, or the lawyer's employees orassociates; or(e) By judicial order, but only if material.

SECTION 29. Duty of confidentiality by former lawyers of alaw firm. — A lawyer shall continue to be bound by the rule onconfidentiality pertaining to clients of his or her previous law office orlaw firm.

SECTION 30. Duty of confidentiality of members of a lawfirm. — A lawyer may disclose the legal matters entrusted by a clientof the firm to the partners and associates, as well as paralegals, legalassistants, law clerks, legal researchers, law interns, and other non-legalstaff, who are or will be involved in the handling of the client’s account,unless expressly prohibited by the client.A lawyer directly entrusted with a client’s confidences shalladopt necessary measures to prevent other members of the law firm,both legal and non-legal, to whom the client’s confidences have beenshared, from disclosing or using them, without the written informedconsent of the client.

SECTION 31. Prohibition against filial disclosure. — Alawyer shall not discuss a client’s confidences even with familymembers.

SECTION 32. Non-disclosure of legal consultation. — Alawyer shall not reveal that he or she has been consulted about aparticular case except to avoid possible conflict of interest.

SECTION 33. Foreign lawyers. — Foreign lawyers cannot,directly or indirectly, practice law in the Philippines.

SECTION 34. Active participation in the development of thelegal profession. — A lawyer shall participate in the development ofthe legal system by initiating or supporting efforts in law reform, theimprovement of the administration of justice, strengthening the judicialand legal system, and advocacies in areas of special concern such as theenvironment, indigenous peoples’ rights, human rights, access tojustice, and good governance.

SECTION 35. Limited Legal Services. — Limited LegalServices refer to services for a specific legal incident, with theexpectation by the lawyer and the client that the lawyer will not providecontinuing legal services in the matter. This includes being appointedas counsel de officio only for arraignment purposes or specialappearances to make any court submission, to give advice, to draft legaldocuments, to provide legal assistance before courts or administrativebadies, and the like.In all instances, the lawyer shall state that the service beingrendered is in the nature of Limited Legal Services.A lawyer who renders Limited Legal Services shall be entitled tocompensation as may be agreed upon or provided by the Rules of Court.

SECTION 36. Pro bono Limited Legal Services. — A lawyerappointed by the court as counsel de officio shall not refuse to renderLimited Legal Services pro bono on the ground of conflict of interest.Instead, the lawyer shall disclose to all affected parties such conflict of interest.In any case, the lawyer may not refuse to render such pro bonolegal services to the person concerned if only to the extent necessary tosafeguard the latter’s fundamental rights and not to deprive such personof remedies available under the law or rules.A lawyer currently serving in the government shall not be exemptfrom pro bono service and may be appointed by any court, tribunal, orother government agency as counsel de officio, unless prohibited bylaw, or the applicable Civil Service rules and regulations, or when there1s a conflict of interest with the government.

SECTION 37. Duty of confidentiality in Limited LegalServices. — A lawyer who provides Limited Legal Services mustprotect the client’s private confidences to the same extent as if engagedunder regular terms.

SECTION 38. Termination of Limited Legal Services. —Unless governed by Canon III, Section 36, a lawyer must cease toprovide Limited Legal Services to a client when the lawyer becomesaware that there may be an actual or potential conflict of interest, exceptwith the written informed consent of the client.In all cases, the Limited Legal Services terminates upon thecompletion of such services.

SECTION 39. Limited Legal Services of law studentpractitioners. — The Limited Legal Services rendered by a law studentpractitioner under the Clinical Legal Education Program shall begoverned by the CPRA.

SECTION 40. Accountability of legal clinic director andsupervising lawyer. —- A law student clinic director and supervisinglawyer, under Rule 138-A of the Rules of Court shall providemeaningful training to law students. They shall assume responsibilityfor any work performed by the law student while under theirsupervision and shall comply with all the laws, rules, and guidelinespertaining to Law Student Practice.

SECTION 41. Fair and reasonable fees. — A lawyer shallcharge only fair and reasonable fees.Attorney’s fees shall be deemed fair and reasonable ifdetermined based on the following factors:(a) The time spent and the extent of the service rendered orrequired;(b) The novelty and difficulty of the issues involved;(c) The skill or expertise of the lawyer, including the level ofstudy and experience required for the engagement;(d) The probability of losing other engagements as a result ofacceptance of the case;(e) The customary charges for similar services and therecommended schedule of fees, which the IBP chaptershall provide;(f) The quantitative or qualitative value of the client’s interestin the engagement, or the benefits resulting to the clientfrom the service;(g) The contingency or certainty of compensation;(h) The character of the engagement, whether limited,seasonal, or otherwise; and(i) Other analogous factors.

SECTION 42. Division of fees upon referral. — A lawyer shall,in case of referral of legal services in favor of another lawyer with thewritten informed consent of the client, be entitled to a division of feesin proportion to the work performed and responsibility assumed.Where a lawyer undertakes to complete unfinished legal businessof a deceased lawyer, a division or sharing of fees is allowed with thedeceased lawyer’s legal heirs or estate.

SECTION 43. Nen-Sharing of fees with non-lawyers. — Alawyer shall not share, split, or divide or stipulate to divide, directly orindirectly, a fee for legal services with persons or organizations notlicensed or authorized to practice law.

SECTION 44. Payment of compensation by third party. — Alawyer shall not receive any fee, reward, costs, commission, interest,rebate or forwarding allowance or other compensation from anyoneother than the client, except upon the written informed consent of suchclient.Receipt of compensation from someone other than the clientmust not interfere with the lawyer's independence, professionaljudgment, or the lawyer-client relationship. Neither should informationrelating to representation of a client be disclosed in violation of the ruleon privileged communication.

SECTION 45. Prompt payment of legal fees. — A lawyer isentitled to prompt payment from the client of attorney’s fees.Absent an express agreement as to professional fees, a lawyer isentitled to be paid reasonable attorney’s fees in accordance with CanonIII, Section 41.

SECTION 46. Controversy over legal fees. — A lawyer shallavoid any controversy with a client concerning fees for legal servicesand shall resort to judicial action solely to prevent imposition, injusticeor fraud.

SECTION 47. Enforcement of attorney’s lien. — In case ofnon-payment of attorney’s fees, a lawyer may resort to the enforcementof the attorney’s lien under Canon III, Section 54, by filing a Notice ofEnforcement of Attorney’s Lien with the court, tribunal, or othergovernment agency of origin where the action or proceeding the lawyerrendered service for is pending, without prejudice to other remediesunder the law or the Rules of Court. The Notice shall be accompaniedby proof of the services rendered, and served on the client. The court,tribunal, or other government agency, after hearing, shall determine thelawyer’s entitlement to the claimed fees.The enforcement of an attorney’s lien shall be treated as anindependent claim and shall in no instance delay the resolution of themain case. The resolution of the lawyer’s claim may be included in themain judgment or in a separate partial judgment. In the case of a partialjudgment, the same shall be subject of appeal.An appeal in the main case shall not stay the execution of thelawyer’s lien. In the execution of the judgment in the main case, thecourt shall give due consideration to the pending claim of the lawyer.If the claim for attorney’s lien arises after a decision has beenrendered by the court, tribunal, or other government agency of origin on the action or proceeding, the claim for the enforcement of the lienshall be by an independent action.

SECTION 48. Compensation for counsel de officio. — Subjectto availability of funds as may be provided by law, the court may, in itsdiscretion, order a lawyer engaged as counsel de officio to becompensated in such sum as the court may fix following Canon III,Section 41, provided that it is not covered by the provision on LimitedLegal Services.

SECTION 49. Accounting during engagement. — A lawyer,during the existence of the lawyer-client relationship, shall account forand prepare an inventory of any fund or property belonging to the client,whether received from the latter or from a third person, immediatelyupon such receipt.When funds are entrusted to a lawyer by a client for a specificpurpose, the lawyer shall use such funds only for the client’s declaredpurpose. Any unused amount of the entrusted funds shall be promptlyreturned to the client upon accomplishment of the stated purpose or theclient’s demand.

SECTION 50. Separate funds. — A lawyer shall keep the fundsof the clients separate and apart from his or her own and those of otherskept by the lawyer.

SECTION 51. Prohibition against acquiring interest in objectof litigation or transaction. — A lawyer shall not acquire, directly orindirectly, a proprietary interest in the property or rights which is theobject of any litigation or transaction in which the lawyer may take partby virtue of the profession.

SECTION 52. Prohibition on lending and borrowing;exceptions. — During the existence of the lawyer-client relationship, alawyer shall not lend money to a client, except under urgent andjustifiable circumstances. Advances for professional fees and necessaryexpenses in a legal matter the lawyer is handling for a client shall notbe covered by this rule.Neither shall a lawyer borrow money from a client during theexistence of the lawyer-client relationship, unless the client’s interestsare fully protected by the nature of the case, or by independent advice.This rule does not apply to standard commercial transactions forproducts or services that the client offers to the public in general, orwhere the lawyer and the client have an existing or prior business relationship, or where there is a contract between the lawyer and theclient.

SECTION 53. Termination of engagement by the lawyer. — Alawyer shall terminate the lawyer-client engagement only for goodcause and upon written notice, in any of the following cases:(a) When the client pursues an illegal or immoral course ofconduct in connection with the engagement;(b) When the client insists that the lawyer pursue conduct thatis violative of these Canons and rules;(c) When the lawyer’s inability to work with a co-counsel willnot promote the best interest of the client;(d) When the moral predisposition or the mental or physicalcondition of the lawyer renders it difficult to carry out theengagement effectively;(e) When the client deliberately fails to pay the fees for thelawyer’s services, fails to comply with the retaineragreement, or can no longer be found despite diligentefforts;(f) When the lawyer is elected or appointed to public office;(g) Other similar cases.

SECTION 54. Termination of engagement by the client. —The lawyer-client engagement may be terminated by the client at anytime upon loss of trust and confidence.The termination of the engagement shall not relieve the clientfrom full payment of all professional fees due to the lawyer. If theengagement has been reduced to writing, the lawyer shall be entitled torecover from the client the full compensation stipulated, unless foundby the court, tribunal or other government agency to be unconscionableor unreasonable under Canon III, Section 41 of the CPRA.For the payment of the compensation, the lawyer shall have acharging lien upon all judgments for the payment of money, and executions issued in pursuance of such judgment, rendered in the casewhere the lawyer’s services had been retained by the client.

SECTION 55, Termination of engagement upon death. — Thedeath of the lawyer or client shall terminate the lawyer-clientrelationship. The death of such lawyer shall not extinguish the lawyer-client engagement between the law firm and the client handled by suchlaw firm.

SECTION 56. Accounting and turn over upon termination ofengagement. — A lawyer who is discharged from or terminates theengagement shall, subject to an attorney’s lien, immediately render afull account of and turn over all documents, evidence, funds, andproperties belonging to the client.The lawyer shall cooperate with the chosen successor in theorderly transfer of the legal matter, including all information necessaryfor the efficient handling of the client’s representation.A lawyer shall have a lien upon the funds, documents, and papersof the client which have lawfully come into his or her possession andmay retain the same until the fair and reasonable fees and disbursementshave been paid, and may apply such funds to the satisfaction thereof.

CANON IV COMPETENCE AND DILIGENCEA lawyer professionally handling a client’s cause shall, to the best of his orher ability, observe competence, diligence, commitment, and skill consistent withthe fiduciary nature of the lawyer-client relationship, regardless of the nature of thelegal matter or issues involved, and whether for a fee or pro bono.

SECTION 1. Competent, efficient and conscientious service.— A lawyer shall provide legal service that is competent, efficient, andconscientious. A lawyer shall be thorough in research, preparation, andapplication of the legal knowledge and skills necessary for anengagement.

SECTION 2. Undertaking legal services; collaboratingcounsel. — A lawyer shall only undertake legal services he or she candeliver.With the prior written consent of the client, a lawyer may securethe services of a collaborating counsel.

SECTION 3. Diligence and punctuality. — A lawyer shalldiligently and seasonably act on any legal matter entrusted by a client.A lawyer shall be punctual in all appearances, submissions ofpleadings and documents before any court, tribunal or othergovernment agency, and all matters professionally referred by theclient, including meetings and other commitments.

SECTION 4. Diligence in all undertakings. — A lawyer shallobserve diligence in all professional undertakings, and shall not causeor occasion delay in any legal matter before any court, tribunal, or otheragency.A lawyer shall appear for trial adequately familiar with the law,the facts of the case, and the evidence to be presented. A lawyer shallalso be ready with the object and documentary evidence, as well as thejudicial affidavits of the witnesses, when required by the rules or thecourt.

SECTION 5. Prompt and objective assessment of the merits.— A lawyer shall, after reasonable inquiry, promptly give an objectiveassessment of the merits and probable results of the client’s case.A lawyer shall explain the viable options to the client to enablean informed decision regarding the matter.

SECTION 6. Duty to update the client. — A lawyer shallregularly inform the client of the status and the result of the matterundertaken, and any action in connection thereto, and shall respondwithin a reasonable time to the client’s request for information.

SECTION 7. Extension of time to file. — A lawyer shall avoidasking for an extension of time to file any pleading, motion, or othercourt submission, except when allowed by the Rules of Court or forgood cause.When an extension is obtained, the lawyer shall not let the periodlapse without submitting the pleading, motion, or other courtsubmission, except upon the client’s decision not to pursue the case anyfurther or for other justifiable cause.

SECTION 8. Lifelong learning. — A competent lawyerengages in lifelong learning through the continued development ofprofessional skills.

SECTION 9. Practice of law concurrent with anotherprofession. — A lawyer who is engaged in another profession oroccupation concurrently with the practice of law shall expresslyprovide in the pertinent contract the nature of the services the lawyer isengaged to perform.The practice of another profession or occupation shall notjeopardize such lawyer’s competence, integrity, probity, andindependence in rendering legal services.

SECTION 10. Nen-legal activities. — A lawyer who is engagedin business or other non-legal profession shall likewise observe theethical duties and responsibilities of a lawyer under the CPRA.

