CANON 1

INDEPENDENCE
The Independence of a lawyer in the discharge of professional duties without any improper influence, restriction, pressure, or interference, direct or indirect, ensures effective legal representation and is ultimately imperative for the rule of law.

SECTION 1. Independent, accessible, efficient, and effective legal service. — A lawyer shall make legal services accessible in an efficient and effective manner. In performing this duty, a lawyer shall maintain independence, act with integrity, and at all times ensure the efficient and effective delivery of justice.

SECTION 2. Merit-based practice. — A lawyer shall rely solely on the merits of a cause and not exert, or give the appearance of, any influence on, nor undermine the authority of, the court, tribunal or other government agency, or its proceedings.

SECTION 3. Freedom from improper considerations and external influences. — A lawyer shall not, in advocating a client’s cause, be influenced by dishonest or immoral considerations, external influences, or pressure.

SECTION 4. Non-interference by a lawyer. — Unless authorized by law or a court, a lawyer shall not assist or cause a branch, agency, office or officer of the government to interfere in any matter before any court, tribunal, or other government agency.

SECTION 5. Lawyer’s duty and discretion in procedure. — A lawyer shall not allow the client to dictate or determine the procedure in handling the case. Nevertheless, a lawyer shall respect the client’s decision to settle or compromise the case after explaining its consequences to the client.

CANON 2 
PROPRIETY
A lawyer shall, at all times, act with propriety and maintain the appearance of propriety in personal and professional dealings, observe honesty, respect and courtesy, and uphold the dignity of the legal profession consistent with the highest standards of ethical behavior.

SECTION 1. Proper conduct. — A lawyer shall not engage in unlawful, dishonest, immoral, or deceitful conduct.

SECTION 2. Dignified conduct. — A lawyer shall respect the law, the courts, tribunals, and other government agencies, their officials, employees, and processes, and act with courtesy, civility, fairness, and candor towards fellow members of the bar. A lawyer shall not engage in conduct that adversely reflects on one’s fitness to practice law, nor behave in a scandalous manner, whether in public or private life, to the discredit of the legal profession.

SECTION 3. Safe environment; avoid all forms of abuse or harassment. — A lawyer shall not create or promote an unsafe or hostile environment, both in private and public settings, whether online, in workplaces, educational or training institutions, or in recreational areas.To this end, a lawyer shall not commit any form of physical, sexual, psychological, or economic abuse or violence against another person. A lawyer is also prohibited from engaging in any gender-based harassment or discrimination.

SECTION 4. Use of dignified, gender-fair, and child- andculturally-sensitive language. —- A lawyer shall use only dignified,gender-fair, child- and culturally-sensitive language in all personal andprofessional dealings.To this end, a lawyer shall not use language which is abusive,intemperate, offensive or otherwise improper, oral or written, andwhether made through traditional or electronic means, including allforms or types of mass or social media.

SECTION 5. Observance of fairness and obedience. — Alawyer shall, in every personal and professional engagement, insist onthe observance of the principles of fairness and obedience to the law.

SECTION 6. Harassing or threatening conduct. — A lawyershall not harass or threaten a fellow lawyer, the latter’s client orprincipal, a witness, or any official or employee of a court, tribunal, orother government agency. 

SECTION 7. Formal decorum and appearance. — A lawyershall observe formal decorum before all courts, tribunals, and othergovernment agencies.A lawyer’s attire shall be consistent with the dignity of the court,tribunal, or other government agency, with due respect to the person’ssexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression.

SECTION 8. Prohibition against misleading the court,tribunal, or other government agency. — A lawyer shall not misquote,misrepresent, or mislead the court as to the existence or the contents ofany document, argument, evidence, law, or other legal authority, or passoff as one’s own the ideas or words of another, or assert as a fact thatwhich has not been proven.

SECTION 9. Qbstructing access to evidence or altering,destroying, or concealing evidence. — A lawyer shall not obstructanother lawyer’s access to evidence during trial, including testimonialevidence, or alter, destroy, or conceal evidence.

SECTION 10. Conduct in the presentation of a witness. — Alawyer shall avoid all forms of impropriety when presenting orconfronting a witness.A lawyer shall not coach, abuse, discriminate against, or harassany witness, in or out of the court, tribunal, or other governmentagency, or talk to a witness during a break or recess in the trial, while awitness is still under examination. Neither shall a lawyer direct, assist,or abet any misrepresentation or falsehood by a witness.

SECTION 11. False representations or statements; duty tocorrect, — A lawyer shall not make false representations or statements.A lawyer shall be liable for any material damage caused by such falserepresentations or statements.A lawyer shall not, in demand letters or other similarcorrespondence, make false representations or statements, or imputecivil, criminal, or administrative liability, without factual or legal basis.A lawyer shall correct false or inaccurate statements andinformation made in relation to an application for admission to the bar,any pleading, or any other document required by or submitted to thecourt, tribunal or agency, as soon as its falsity or inaccuracy isdiscovered or made known to him or her.

SECTION 12. Duty to report dishonest, deceitful, ormisleading conduct. --- A \awyer shall immediately inform a court,tribunal, or other government agency of any dishonest, deceitful ormisleading conduct related to a matter being handled by said lawyerbefore such court, tribunal, or other government agency.A lawyer shall also report to the appropriate authority anytransaction or unlawful activity that is required to be reported underrelevant laws, including the submission of covered and suspicioustransactions under regulatory laws, such as those concerning anti-money laundering. When disclosing or reporting the foregoinginformation to the appropriate court, tribunal, or other governmentagency, the lawyer shall not be deemed to have violated the lawyer’sduty of confidentiality.Any such information shall be treated with strict confidentiality.A baseless report shall be subject to civil, criminal, oradministrative action.

SECTION 13. Imputation of a misconduct, impropriety, orcrime without basis. —~ A lawyer shall not, directly or indirectly,impute to or accuse another lawyer of a misconduct, impropriety, or acrime in the absence of factual or legal basis.Neither shall a lawyer, directly or indirectly, file or cause to befiled, or assist in the filing of frivolous or baseless administrative, civil,or criminal complaints against another lawyer.

SECTION 14. Remedy for grievances; insinuation of impropermotive. —— A lawyer shall submit grievances against any officer of acourt, tribunal, or other government agency only through theappropriate remedy and before the proper authorities.Statements insinuating improper motive on the part of any suchofficer, which are not supported by substantial evidence, shall beground for disciplinary action.

SECTION 15. Improper claim of influence or familiarity. —A lawyer shall observe propriety in all dealings with officers andpersonnel of any court, tribunal, or other government agency, whetherpersonal or professional. Familiarity with such officers and personnelthat will give rise to an appearance of impropriety, influence, or favorshall be avoided.A lawyer shall not make claims of power, influence, orrelationship with any officer of a court, tribunal, or other governmentagency.

SECTION 16. Duty to report life-threatening situations. — Alawyer who has reasonable grounds to believe that a life-threateningsituation is likely to develop in relation to any proceeding in any court,tribunal, or other government agency shall immediately report the sameto the proper authorities.

SECTION 17. Non-solicitation and — impermissibleadvertisement. — A lawyer shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit, orappear to solicit, legal business.A lawyer shall not, directly or indirectly, advertise legal serviceson any platform or media except with the use of dignified, verifiable,and factual information, including biographical data, contact details,fields of practice, services offered, and the like, so as to allow apotential client to make an informed choice. In no case shall thepermissible advertisement be self-laudatory.A lawyer, law firm, or any of their representatives shall not payor give any benefit or consideration to any media practitioner, award-giving body, professional organization, or personality, in anticipationof, or in return for, publicity or recognition, to attract legalrepresentation, service, or retainership.

SECTION 18. Prohibition against self-promotion. — A lawyershall not make public appearances and statements in relation to aterminated case or legal matter for the purpose of self-promotion, self-aggrandizement, or to seek public sympathy.

SECTION 19, Sub-judice rule. — A lawyer shall not use anyforum or medium to comment or publicize opinion pertaining to apending proceeding before any court, tribunal, or other governmentagency that may:(a) cause a pre-judgment, or(b) sway public perception so as to impede, obstruct, orinfluence the decision of such court, tribunal, or othergovernment agency, or which tends to tarnish the court’sor tribunal’s integrity, or(c) impute improper motives against any of its members, or(d) create a widespread perception of guilt or innocencebefore a final decision.

SECTION 20. Disclosure of relationship or connection. — Alawyer shall, at the first available opportunity, formally disclose onrecord the lawyer’s relationship or connection with the presiding officerof any court, tribunal, or other government agency, or any of itspersonnel, or the lawyer’s partners, associates, or clients, that may serveas a ground for mandatory inhibition in any pending proceeding beforesuch court, tribunal, or other government agency.

SECTION 21. Prohibition against gift-giving and donations.—— A lawyer shall not, directly or indirectly, give gifts, donations,contributions of any value or sort, on any occasion, to any court,tribunal or government agency, or any of its officers and personnel.

SECTION 22. No undue advantage of ignorance of the law. —A lawyer shall not take advantage of a non-lawyer’s lack of educationor knowledge of the law.

SECTION 23. Instituting multiple cases; forum shopping. —A lawyer shall not knowingly engage or through gross negligence inforum shopping, which offends against the administration of justice,and is a falsehood foisted upon the court, tribunal, or other governmentagency.A lawyer shall not institute or advise the client to institutemultiple cases to gain leverage in a case, to harass a party, to delay theproceedings, or to increase the cost of litigation.

SECTION 24. Encroaching or interfering in another lawyer’sengagement; exception. —- A lawyer shall not, directly or indirectly,encroach upon or interfere in the professional engagement of anotherlawyer.This includes a lawyer’s attempt to communicate, negotiate, ordeal with the person represented by another lawyer on any matter,whether pending or not in any court, tribunal, body, or agency, unlesswhen initiated by the client or with the knowledge of the latter’s lawyer.A lawyer, however, may give proper advice and assistance toanyone seeking relief against perceived unfaithful or neglectful counselbased on the Code.

SECTION 25. Responsibility of a solo practitioner. — Alawyer in solo practice shall ensure that all matters requiring suchlawyer’s professional skill and judgment are promptly and competentlyaddressed.

SECTION 26. Definition of a law firm; choice of firm name.— A law firm is any private office, partnership, or association,exclusively comprised of a lawyer or lawyers engaged to practice law,and who hold themselves out as such to the public.In the choice of a firm name, no false, misleading, or assumedname shall be used. The continued use of the name of a deceased,incapacitated, or retired partner is permissible provided that the firmindicates in all its communications that said partner is deceased,incapacitated, or retired.

SECTION 27. Partner who assumes public office. —- When apartner assumes public office, such partner shall withdraw from thefirm and such partner’s name shall be removed from the firm name,unless allowed by law to practice concurrently.

SECTION 28. Dignified government service. — Lawyers ingovernment service shall observe the standard of conduct under theCPRA, the Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Public Officialsand Employees, and other related laws and issuances in theperformance of their duties.Any violation of the CPRA by lawyers in government serviceshall be subject to disciplinary action, separate and distinct fromliability under pertinent laws or rules.

SECTION 29. Lawyers formerly in government service. — Alawyer who has left government service shall not engage in privatepractice pertaining to any matter before the office where he or she usedto be connected within a period of one (1) year from his or herseparation from such office. Justices, judges, clerks of court, city,provincial, and regional prosecutors shall not appear before any courtwithin. the territorial jurisdiction where they previously served withinthe same period.After leaving government service, a lawyer shall not accept anengagement which could improperly influence the outcome of theproceedings which the lawyer handled or intervened in, or over whichthe lawyer previously exercised authority, while in said service.

SECTION 30. No financial interest in transactions; no gifts.— A lawyer in government shal! not, directly or indirectly, promote oradvance his or her private or financial interest or that of another, in anytransaction requiring the approval of his or her office. Neither shallsuch lawyer solicit gifts or receive anything of value in relation to suchinterest.Such lawyer in government shall not give anything of value to,or otherwise unduly favor, any person transacting with his or her office,with the expectation of any benefit in return.

SECTION 31. Prosecution of criminal cases. —- The primaryduty of a public prosecutor is not to convict but to see that justice isdone.Suppressing facts, concealing of, tampering with or destroyingevidence, coaching a witness, or offering false testimony is cause fordisciplinary action.The obligations of a public prosecutor shall also be imposed uponlawyers in the private practice who are authorized to prosecute underthe direct supervision and control of the public prosecutor.

SECTION 32. Lawyers in the academe. —~ A lawyer serving asa dean, administrative officer, or faculty member of an educationalinstitution shall at all times adhere to the standards of behavior requiredof members of the legal profession under the CPRA, observingpropriety, respectability, and decorum inside and outside the classroom,and in all media.

SECTION 33. Conflict of interest for lawyers in the academe.— A lawyer serving as a dean, administrative officer, or facultymember of an educational institution shal! disclose to the institution anyadverse interest of a client.Upon discovery of any adverse interest of the lawyer’s clientwhich directly affects any student who is under his or her directsupervision and guidance, the lawyer shall likewise disclose the sameto the institution.

SECTION 34. Paralegal services; lawyer’s responsibility. — Aparalegal is one who performs tasks that require familiarity with legalconcepts, employed or retained by a lawyer, law office, corporation,governmental agency, or other entity for non-diagnostic and non-advisory work in relation to legal matters delegated by such lawyer, lawoffice, corporation, governmental agency, or other entity.A lawyer must direct or supervise a paralegal in the performanceof the latter’s delegated duties.The lawyer’s duty of confidentiality shall also extend to theservices rendered by the paralegal, who is equally bound to keep theprivilege.

SECTION 35. Non-delegable legal tasks. — A lawyer shall notdelegate to or permit a non-lawyer, including a paralegal, to:(a) accept cases on behalf of the lawyer;(b) give legal advice or opinion;(c) act independently without the lawyer’s supervision ordirection;(d) to hold himself or herself out as a lawyer, or be named inassociation with a lawyer in any pleading or submission toany court, tribunal, or other government agency;(e) appear in any court, tribunal, or other government agency,or actively participate in formal legal proceedings onbehalf of a client, except when allowed by the law or rules;(f) conduct negotiations with third parties unless allowed inadministrative agencies, without a lawyer’s supervision ordirection;(g) sign correspondence containing a legal opinion; and(h) perform any of the duties that only lawyers may undertake.These provisions shall not apply to law student practitionersunder Rule 138-A of the Rules of Court.RESPONSIBLE USE OF SOCIAL MEDIAA lawyer shall uphold the dignity of the legal profession in all social mediainteractions in a manner that enhances the people’s confidence in the legal system,as well as promote its responsible use.

SECTION 36. Responsible use. — A lawyer shall have the duty tounderstand the benefits, risks, and ethical implications associated with the useof social media.

SECTION 37. Online posts. —- A lawyer shall ensure that his or heronline posts, whether made in a public or restricted privacy setting that stillholds an audience, uphold the dignity of the legal profession and shield it fromdisrepute, as well as maintain respect for the law.

SECTION 38. Non-posting of false or unverified statements,disinformation. — A lawyer shall not knowingly or maliciously post, share,upload or otherwise disseminate false or unverified statements, claims, orcommit any other act of disinformation.

SECTION 39. Prohibition against fraudulent accounts. — A lawyershall not create, maintain or operate accounts in social media to hide his orher identity for the purpose of circumventing the law or the provisions of theCPRA.

SECTION 40. Non-disclosure of privileged information throughonline posts. — A lawyer shall not reveal, directly or indirectly, in his or heronline posts confidential information obtained from a client or in the courseof, or emanating from, the representation, except when allowed by law or theCPRA.

SECTION 41. Duty to safeguard client confidences in social media.— A lawyer, who uses.a social media account to communicate with any otherperson in relation to client confidences and information, shall exert efforts toprevent the inadvertent or unauthorized disclosure or use of, or unauthorizedaccess to, such an account.

SECTION 42. Prohibition against influence through social media.— A lawyer shall not communicate, whether directly or indirectly, with anofficer of any court, tribunal, or other government agency through socialmedia to influence the latter’s performance of official duties.

SECTION 43. Legal information; legal advice. —- Pursuant to alawyer’s duty to society and the legal profession, a lawyer may providegeneral legal information, including in answer to questions asked, at any fora,through traditional or electronic means, in all forms or types of mass or socialmedia.A lawyer who gives legal advice on a specific set of facts as disclosedby.a potential client in such fora or media dispenses Limited Legal Serviceand shall be bound by all the duties in the CPRA, in relation to such LimitedLegal Service.

SECTION 44, Online posts that could violate conflict of interest. —A lawyer shall exercise prudence in making posts or comments in social mediathat could violate the provisions on conflict of interest under the CPRA.

CANON III
FIDELITY
Fidelity pertains to a lawyer’s duty to uphold the Constitution and the laws ofthe land, to assist in the administration of justice as an officer of the court, and toadvance or defend a client’s cause, with full devotion, genuine interest, and zeal inthe pursuit of truth and justice.

SECTION 1. Practice of law. — The practice of law is therendition of legal service or performance of acts or the application oflaw, legal principles, and judgment, in or out of court, with regard tothe circumstances or objectives of a person or a cause, and pursuant toa lawyer-client relationship or other engagement governed by theCPRA. It includes employment in the public service or private sectorand requires membership in the Philippine bar as qualification.

SECTION 2. The responsible and accountable lawyer. — Alawyer shall uphold the constitution, obey the laws of the land, promoterespect for laws and legal processes, safeguard human rights, and at alltimes advance the honor and integrity of the legal profession.As an officer of the court, a lawyer shall uphold the rule of lawand conscientiously assist in the speedy and efficient administration ofjustice.As an advocate, a lawyer shall represent the client with fidelityand zeal within the bounds of the law and the CPRA.

SECTION 3. Lawyer-client relationship. — A lawyer-clientrelationship is of the highest fiduciary character. As a trust relation, itis essential that the engagement is founded on the confidence reposedby the client on the lawyer. Therefore, a lawyer-client relationship shallarise when the client consciously, voluntarily and in good faith vests alawyer with the client’s confidence for the purpose of rendering legalservices such as providing legal advice or representation, and thelawyer, whether expressly or impliedly, agrees to render such services.

SECTION 4. Authority of lawyer to bind client. — A lawyercan bind a client in a legal engagement only when so authorized througha written agreement. The lawyer, however, cannot compromise aclient’s litigation, or receive anything in discharge of a client’s claim,without a special power of attorney for such purpose.

SECTION 5. Authority of lawyer to appear. — A lawyer ispresumed to be properly authorized to represent any cause in which heor she appears, and no written power of attorney is required to authorizehim or her to appear in court for the client.The court, tribunal, or other government agency may, on its owninitiative or on motion of either party, on just cause, require a lawyer toproduce or prove the authority to appear on behalf of the client.

SECTION 6. Fiduciary duty of a lawyer. — A lawyer shall bemindful of the trust and confidence reposed by the client.To this end, a lawyer shall not abuse or exploit the relationshipwith a client.

SECTION 7. Prohibition against frivolous suits and abuse ofcourt processes. — A lawyer shall not:(a) file or encourage the filing of any suit or proceeding notauthorized by law or jurisprudence and without anyevidentiary support;(b) unduly impede the execution of an order or judgmentwhich is warranted; or(c) abuse court processes.

SECTION 8. Lawyer's duty to encourage settlement. — Alawyer shall encourage the client to avoid, end or settle a controversy,whether pending or not, in order to reach a settlement or a compromiseif the matter can be compromised under the law and will admit of a fairsettlement.To this end, the lawyer shall actively assist the parties and thecourt, tribunal, or other government agency to effect mediation and/ordispute resolution.

SECTION 9. Duty to call client to rectify fraudulent act. — Alawyer who receives information that a client has, in the course of therepresentation, perpetrated a fraud in relation to any matter subject ofthe representation before a court, tribunal, or other government agency,or against any officer thereof, shall promptly call upon the client torectify the same. Such fraudulent act on the part of the client shall be aground for the termination by the lawyer of the engagement.

SECTION 10. Responsibility over a subordinate lawyer,paralegal, or employee. — A lawyer or law firm shall be responsiblefor the mistakes, negligence, and/or acts or omissions of a subordinatelawyer, paralegal, or employee under the lawyer’s direct supervisionand control, who is acting within the scope of the assigned tasks, thatcause damage or injury which brings dishonor to the profession orviolates the rule on confidentiality.However, such liability of the supervising lawyer does not attachupon proof of exercise of diligence of a good parent of a family in theselection and supervision of subordinate lawyer, paralegal, oremployee.

SECTION 11. Responsibility of a supervisory lawyer over asupervised lawyer. — A supervisory lawyer shall co-sign a pleading orother submission to any court, tribunal, or other government agencywith a supervised lawyer. A supervisory lawyer shall be responsible fora violation of the CPRA by the supervised lawyer in any of thefollowing instances:(a) the supervisory lawyer orders or directs the specificconduct or, with knowledge of the specific conduct,ratifies it; or(b) the supervisory lawyer knows of such conduct at a timewhen it could be prevented or its consequences avoided ormitigated, but fails to take reasonable remedial action; or(c) the supervisory lawyer should have known of the conductso that reasonable remedial action could have been takenat a time when the consequences of the conduct could havebeen avoided or mitigated.A supervisory lawyer is a lawyer having direct supervisoryauthority over another lawyer, including a supervising lawyer underRule 138-A of the Rules of Court.

SECTION 12. Responsibilities of a supervised lawyer. — Asupervised lawyer acting under the direction of the supervising lawyer,managing partner, or other partners of the firm is nevertheless boundby the CPRA.

SECTION 13. Conflict of interest. — A lawyer shall notrepresent conflicting interests except by written informed consent of allconcerned given after a full disclosure of the facts.There is conflict of interest when a lawyer represents inconsistentor opposing interests of two or more persons. The test is whether inbehalf of one client it is the lawyer’s duty to fight for an issue or claim,but which is his or her duty to oppose for the other client.

SECTION 14. Prohibition against conflict-of-interestrepresentation; current clients. — In relation to current clients, thefollowing rules shall be observed:(a) A lawyer shall not enter into a business transaction with aclient or knowingly acquire an ownership, possessory,security, or other pecuniary interest adverse to a clientunless:(1) it is shown that the transaction and terms on whichthe lawyer acquires the interest are fair andreasonable to the client and are fully disclosed andtransmitted in writing in a manner that can bereasonably understood by the client;(2) the client is advised in writing of the desirability ofseeking, and is given a reasonable opportunity toseek, the advice of another independent lawyer onthe transaction; and(3) the client gives written informed consent to theessential terms of the transaction and the lawyer's(a) role in the transaction, including whether the lawyeris representing the client in the transaction.(b) A lawyer shall not use confidential information relating torepresentation of a client without the client’s writteninformed consent, except as permitted or required by lawor the CPRA.(c) A lawyer shall not, by undue influence, acquire anysubstantial gift from a client, including a testamentary gift,or prepare on behalf of a client an instrument giving thelawyer such gift, directly or indirectly.(d) Unless with the written informed consent of the client andsubject to the application of the sub judice rule, a lawyershall not make or negotiate an agreement giving the lawyerliterary or media rights to a portrayal or account based insubstantial part on information relating to therepresentation.(e) A lawyer shall not accept compensation for representing aclient from any person other than the client, unless:(1) the client gives written informed consent;(2) there is no interference with the lawyer'sindependence or professional judgment or with thelawyer-client relationship; or(3) the information relating to representation of a clientis protected as required by the rule on privilegedcommunication.(f) A lawyer, who represents two or more clients in the samecase, in case there is a settlement or plea-bargaining, shalldisclose to all the clients the existence and nature of all theclaims or pleas involved and the participation of eachclient in the settlement or plea-bargaining.(g) A lawyer shall avoid testifying in behalf of the client,except: (1) on formal matters, such as the mailing,authentication or custody of an instrument, and thelike; or(2) on substantial matters, in cases where the testimonyis essential to the ends of justice, in which event thelawyer must, during the testimony, entrust the trialof the case to another counsel.

SECTION 15. Conflict of interest of a lawyer hired by a lawfirm. — When a lawyer joins a law firm, it shall be the duty of thelawyer to disclose to the law firm, at the earliest possible opportunity,his or her previous clients that may have a potential conflict of interestwith the current clients of the law firm. If there is a potential conflictof interest, the lawyer shall not act on the case or cases of the affectedcurrent client.

SECTION 16. Prohibition against dating, romantic, or sexualrelations with a client. — A lawyer shall not have dating, romantic, orsexual relations with a client during the engagement, unless theconsensual relationship existed between them before the lawyer-clientrelationship commenced.

SECTION 17. Prohibition against conflict-of-interestrepresentation; prospective clients. — In relation to prospectiveclients, the following rules shall be observed:(a) A lawyer shall, at the earliest opportunity, ascertain theexistence of any conflict of interest between a prospectiveclient and current clients, and immediately disclose thesame if found to exist.In case of an objection by either the prospective orcurrent client, the lawyer shall not accept the newengagement.(b) A lawyer shall maintain the private confidences of aprospective client even if no engagement materializes, andshall not use any such information to further his or her owninterest, or the interest of any current client.

SECTION 18. Prohibition against conflict-of-interestrepresentation; former clients. — In relation to former clients, thefollowing rules shall be observed:(a) A lawyer shall maintain the private confidences of aformer client even after the termination of the engagement,except upon the written informed consent of the formerclient, or as otherwise allowed under the CPRA or otherapplicable laws or regulations, or when the informationhas become generally known.(b) A lawyer shall not use information relating to the formerrepresentation, except as the CPRA or applicable laws andregulations would permit or require with respect to acurrent or prospective client, or when the information hasbecome generally known.(c) Unless the former client gives written informed consent, alawyer who has represented such client in a legal mattershall not thereafter represent a prospective client in thesame or related legal matter, where the prospective client’sinterests are materially adverse to the former client’sinterests.

SECTION 19. Corporate lawyers; conflict of interest. — Inrelation to organizational clients, a lawyer who represents a corporationor any organization does not, by virtue of such representation,necessarily represent any constituent or affiliated organization, such asa parent or subsidiary.A lawyer for a corporation or other organization, who is also amember of its board of directors or trustees, shall determine whetherthe responsibilities of the two roles may conflict. In the event of thelatter, the lawyer shall disclose the conflict of interest to all concernedparties.

SECTION 20. Legal services organization; conflict of interest.— A legal services organization is any private organization, includinga legal aid clinic, partnership, association, or corporation, whoseprimary purpose is to provide free legal services.A lawyer-client relationship shall arise only between the clientand the handling lawyers of the legal services organization. All thelawyers of the legal services organization who participated in thehandling of a legal matter shall be covered by the rule on conflict ofinterest and confidentiality.

SECTION 21. Lawyers in government service; conflict of interest. — A lawyer currently serving in the government shall not practice law privately, unless otherwise authorized by the Constitution,the law or applicable Civil Service rules and regulations. If allowed,private practice shall be upon the express authority of the lawyer'ssuperior, for a stated specified purpose or engagement, and only duringan approved leave of absence. However, the lawyer shall not representan interest adverse to the government.

SECTION 22. Public Attorney’s Office; conflict of interest. —The Public Attorney’s Office is the primary legal aid service office ofthe government. In the pursuit of its mandate under its charter, thePublic Attorney’s Office shall ensure ready access to its services by themarginalized sectors of society in a manner that takes into considerationthe avoidance of potential conflict of interest situations which will leavethese marginalized parties unassisted by counsel.A conflict of interest of any of the lawyers of the PublicAttorney’s Office incident to services rendered for the Office shall beimputed only to the said lawyer and the lawyer’s direct supervisor.Such conflict of interest shall not disqualify the rest of the lawyers fromthe Public Attorney’s Office from representing the affected client, uponfull disclosure to the latter and written informed consent.

SECTION 23. Amicus curiae. — A lawyer shall not decline,without just cause, a request by any court, tribunal, or other governmentagency to act as amicus curiae in any proceeding relating to thelawyer’s expertise or field of specialization.

SECTION 24. Active involvement in legal education. — Alawyer shall keep abreast of legal developments, participate incontinuing legal education programs, and support efforts to achievestandards of excellence in law schools as well as in the practical trainingof law students.In addition, a lawyer shall assist the Integrated Bar of thePhilippines (IBP), law schools, law alumni associations, lawassociations, or civic organizations, in educating the public on the lawand jurisprudence.The IBP Chapters shall provide supervising lawyers to the legalaid clinics in their jurisdiction.

SECTION 25. Support for legal internship, apprenticeship,and training. — To prepare the next generation of lawyers for ethicalpractice, lawyers shall support legal internship and apprenticeship programs and accept law students for training.The lawyer shall treat the apprentices as junior colleagues andfuture counsels, and shall conscientiously supervise them.

SECTION 26. Prompt payment of membership dues. — Alawyer shall promptly pay the annual membership dues in the IBP,unless expressly exempt from such payment by law or rules.

SECTION 27. Confidentiality of privileged communication. —A lawyer shall maintain the confidences of the client, and shall respectdata privacy laws. The duty of confidentiality shall continue even afterthe termination of the lawyer-client engagement.

SECTION 28. Protecting client confidences. — A lawyer shallnot reveal the confidences of the client, including data from the client’sfiles, except;(a) When a written informed consent is obtained from theclient;(b) When required by law, such as anti-money launderingstatutes, or the Rules of Court;(c) To the extent necessary, to collect the lawyer’s fees;(d) In defense of the lawyer, or the lawyer's employees orassociates; or(e) By judicial order, but only if material.

SECTION 29. Duty of confidentiality by former lawyers of alaw firm. — A lawyer shall continue to be bound by the rule onconfidentiality pertaining to clients of his or her previous law office orlaw firm.

SECTION 30. Duty of confidentiality of members of a lawfirm. — A lawyer may disclose the legal matters entrusted by a clientof the firm to the partners and associates, as well as paralegals, legalassistants, law clerks, legal researchers, law interns, and other non-legalstaff, who are or will be involved in the handling of the client’s account,unless expressly prohibited by the client.A lawyer directly entrusted with a client’s confidences shalladopt necessary measures to prevent other members of the law firm,both legal and non-legal, to whom the client’s confidences have beenshared, from disclosing or using them, without the written informedconsent of the client.

SECTION 31. Prohibition against filial disclosure. — Alawyer shall not discuss a client’s confidences even with familymembers.

SECTION 32. Non-disclosure of legal consultation. — Alawyer shall not reveal that he or she has been consulted about aparticular case except to avoid possible conflict of interest.

SECTION 33. Foreign lawyers. — Foreign lawyers cannot,directly or indirectly, practice law in the Philippines.

SECTION 34. Active participation in the development of thelegal profession. — A lawyer shall participate in the development ofthe legal system by initiating or supporting efforts in law reform, theimprovement of the administration of justice, strengthening the judicialand legal system, and advocacies in areas of special concern such as theenvironment, indigenous peoples’ rights, human rights, access tojustice, and good governance.

SECTION 35. Limited Legal Services. — Limited LegalServices refer to services for a specific legal incident, with theexpectation by the lawyer and the client that the lawyer will not providecontinuing legal services in the matter. This includes being appointedas counsel de officio only for arraignment purposes or specialappearances to make any court submission, to give advice, to draft legaldocuments, to provide legal assistance before courts or administrativebadies, and the like.In all instances, the lawyer shall state that the service beingrendered is in the nature of Limited Legal Services.A lawyer who renders Limited Legal Services shall be entitled tocompensation as may be agreed upon or provided by the Rules of Court.

SECTION 36. Pro bono Limited Legal Services. — A lawyerappointed by the court as counsel de officio shall not refuse to renderLimited Legal Services pro bono on the ground of conflict of interest.Instead, the lawyer shall disclose to all affected parties such conflict of interest.In any case, the lawyer may not refuse to render such pro bonolegal services to the person concerned if only to the extent necessary tosafeguard the latter’s fundamental rights and not to deprive such personof remedies available under the law or rules.A lawyer currently serving in the government shall not be exemptfrom pro bono service and may be appointed by any court, tribunal, orother government agency as counsel de officio, unless prohibited bylaw, or the applicable Civil Service rules and regulations, or when there1s a conflict of interest with the government.

SECTION 37. Duty of confidentiality in Limited LegalServices. — A lawyer who provides Limited Legal Services mustprotect the client’s private confidences to the same extent as if engagedunder regular terms.

SECTION 38. Termination of Limited Legal Services. —Unless governed by Canon III, Section 36, a lawyer must cease toprovide Limited Legal Services to a client when the lawyer becomesaware that there may be an actual or potential conflict of interest, exceptwith the written informed consent of the client.In all cases, the Limited Legal Services terminates upon thecompletion of such services.

SECTION 39. Limited Legal Services of law studentpractitioners. — The Limited Legal Services rendered by a law studentpractitioner under the Clinical Legal Education Program shall begoverned by the CPRA.

SECTION 40. Accountability of legal clinic director andsupervising lawyer. —- A law student clinic director and supervisinglawyer, under Rule 138-A of the Rules of Court shall providemeaningful training to law students. They shall assume responsibilityfor any work performed by the law student while under theirsupervision and shall comply with all the laws, rules, and guidelinespertaining to Law Student Practice.

SECTION 41. Fair and reasonable fees. — A lawyer shallcharge only fair and reasonable fees.Attorney’s fees shall be deemed fair and reasonable ifdetermined based on the following factors:(a) The time spent and the extent of the service rendered orrequired;(b) The novelty and difficulty of the issues involved;(c) The skill or expertise of the lawyer, including the level ofstudy and experience required for the engagement;(d) The probability of losing other engagements as a result ofacceptance of the case;(e) The customary charges for similar services and therecommended schedule of fees, which the IBP chaptershall provide;(f) The quantitative or qualitative value of the client’s interestin the engagement, or the benefits resulting to the clientfrom the service;(g) The contingency or certainty of compensation;(h) The character of the engagement, whether limited,seasonal, or otherwise; and(i) Other analogous factors.

SECTION 42. Division of fees upon referral. — A lawyer shall,in case of referral of legal services in favor of another lawyer with thewritten informed consent of the client, be entitled to a division of feesin proportion to the work performed and responsibility assumed.Where a lawyer undertakes to complete unfinished legal businessof a deceased lawyer, a division or sharing of fees is allowed with thedeceased lawyer’s legal heirs or estate.

SECTION 43. Nen-Sharing of fees with non-lawyers. — Alawyer shall not share, split, or divide or stipulate to divide, directly orindirectly, a fee for legal services with persons or organizations notlicensed or authorized to practice law.

SECTION 44. Payment of compensation by third party. — Alawyer shall not receive any fee, reward, costs, commission, interest,rebate or forwarding allowance or other compensation from anyoneother than the client, except upon the written informed consent of suchclient.Receipt of compensation from someone other than the clientmust not interfere with the lawyer's independence, professionaljudgment, or the lawyer-client relationship. Neither should informationrelating to representation of a client be disclosed in violation of the ruleon privileged communication.

SECTION 45. Prompt payment of legal fees. — A lawyer isentitled to prompt payment from the client of attorney’s fees.Absent an express agreement as to professional fees, a lawyer isentitled to be paid reasonable attorney’s fees in accordance with CanonIII, Section 41.

SECTION 46. Controversy over legal fees. — A lawyer shallavoid any controversy with a client concerning fees for legal servicesand shall resort to judicial action solely to prevent imposition, injusticeor fraud.

SECTION 47. Enforcement of attorney’s lien. — In case ofnon-payment of attorney’s fees, a lawyer may resort to the enforcementof the attorney’s lien under Canon III, Section 54, by filing a Notice ofEnforcement of Attorney’s Lien with the court, tribunal, or othergovernment agency of origin where the action or proceeding the lawyerrendered service for is pending, without prejudice to other remediesunder the law or the Rules of Court. The Notice shall be accompaniedby proof of the services rendered, and served on the client. The court,tribunal, or other government agency, after hearing, shall determine thelawyer’s entitlement to the claimed fees.The enforcement of an attorney’s lien shall be treated as anindependent claim and shall in no instance delay the resolution of themain case. The resolution of the lawyer’s claim may be included in themain judgment or in a separate partial judgment. In the case of a partialjudgment, the same shall be subject of appeal.An appeal in the main case shall not stay the execution of thelawyer’s lien. In the execution of the judgment in the main case, thecourt shall give due consideration to the pending claim of the lawyer.If the claim for attorney’s lien arises after a decision has beenrendered by the court, tribunal, or other government agency of origin on the action or proceeding, the claim for the enforcement of the lienshall be by an independent action.

SECTION 48. Compensation for counsel de officio. — Subjectto availability of funds as may be provided by law, the court may, in itsdiscretion, order a lawyer engaged as counsel de officio to becompensated in such sum as the court may fix following Canon III,Section 41, provided that it is not covered by the provision on LimitedLegal Services.

SECTION 49. Accounting during engagement. — A lawyer,during the existence of the lawyer-client relationship, shall account forand prepare an inventory of any fund or property belonging to the client,whether received from the latter or from a third person, immediatelyupon such receipt.When funds are entrusted to a lawyer by a client for a specificpurpose, the lawyer shall use such funds only for the client’s declaredpurpose. Any unused amount of the entrusted funds shall be promptlyreturned to the client upon accomplishment of the stated purpose or theclient’s demand.

SECTION 50. Separate funds. — A lawyer shall keep the fundsof the clients separate and apart from his or her own and those of otherskept by the lawyer.

SECTION 51. Prohibition against acquiring interest in objectof litigation or transaction. — A lawyer shall not acquire, directly orindirectly, a proprietary interest in the property or rights which is theobject of any litigation or transaction in which the lawyer may take partby virtue of the profession.

SECTION 52. Prohibition on lending and borrowing;exceptions. — During the existence of the lawyer-client relationship, alawyer shall not lend money to a client, except under urgent andjustifiable circumstances. Advances for professional fees and necessaryexpenses in a legal matter the lawyer is handling for a client shall notbe covered by this rule.Neither shall a lawyer borrow money from a client during theexistence of the lawyer-client relationship, unless the client’s interestsare fully protected by the nature of the case, or by independent advice.This rule does not apply to standard commercial transactions forproducts or services that the client offers to the public in general, orwhere the lawyer and the client have an existing or prior business relationship, or where there is a contract between the lawyer and theclient.

SECTION 53. Termination of engagement by the lawyer. — Alawyer shall terminate the lawyer-client engagement only for goodcause and upon written notice, in any of the following cases:(a) When the client pursues an illegal or immoral course ofconduct in connection with the engagement;(b) When the client insists that the lawyer pursue conduct thatis violative of these Canons and rules;(c) When the lawyer’s inability to work with a co-counsel willnot promote the best interest of the client;(d) When the moral predisposition or the mental or physicalcondition of the lawyer renders it difficult to carry out theengagement effectively;(e) When the client deliberately fails to pay the fees for thelawyer’s services, fails to comply with the retaineragreement, or can no longer be found despite diligentefforts;(f) When the lawyer is elected or appointed to public office;(g) Other similar cases.

SECTION 54. Termination of engagement by the client. —The lawyer-client engagement may be terminated by the client at anytime upon loss of trust and confidence.The termination of the engagement shall not relieve the clientfrom full payment of all professional fees due to the lawyer. If theengagement has been reduced to writing, the lawyer shall be entitled torecover from the client the full compensation stipulated, unless foundby the court, tribunal or other government agency to be unconscionableor unreasonable under Canon III, Section 41 of the CPRA.For the payment of the compensation, the lawyer shall have acharging lien upon all judgments for the payment of money, and executions issued in pursuance of such judgment, rendered in the casewhere the lawyer’s services had been retained by the client.

SECTION 55, Termination of engagement upon death. — Thedeath of the lawyer or client shall terminate the lawyer-clientrelationship. The death of such lawyer shall not extinguish the lawyer-client engagement between the law firm and the client handled by suchlaw firm.

SECTION 56. Accounting and turn over upon termination ofengagement. — A lawyer who is discharged from or terminates theengagement shall, subject to an attorney’s lien, immediately render afull account of and turn over all documents, evidence, funds, andproperties belonging to the client.The lawyer shall cooperate with the chosen successor in theorderly transfer of the legal matter, including all information necessaryfor the efficient handling of the client’s representation.A lawyer shall have a lien upon the funds, documents, and papersof the client which have lawfully come into his or her possession andmay retain the same until the fair and reasonable fees and disbursementshave been paid, and may apply such funds to the satisfaction thereof.

CANON IV COMPETENCE AND DILIGENCEA lawyer professionally handling a client’s cause shall, to the best of his orher ability, observe competence, diligence, commitment, and skill consistent withthe fiduciary nature of the lawyer-client relationship, regardless of the nature of thelegal matter or issues involved, and whether for a fee or pro bono.

SECTION 1. Competent, efficient and conscientious service.— A lawyer shall provide legal service that is competent, efficient, andconscientious. A lawyer shall be thorough in research, preparation, andapplication of the legal knowledge and skills necessary for anengagement.

SECTION 2. Undertaking legal services; collaboratingcounsel. — A lawyer shall only undertake legal services he or she candeliver.With the prior written consent of the client, a lawyer may securethe services of a collaborating counsel.

SECTION 3. Diligence and punctuality. — A lawyer shalldiligently and seasonably act on any legal matter entrusted by a client.A lawyer shall be punctual in all appearances, submissions ofpleadings and documents before any court, tribunal or othergovernment agency, and all matters professionally referred by theclient, including meetings and other commitments.

SECTION 4. Diligence in all undertakings. — A lawyer shallobserve diligence in all professional undertakings, and shall not causeor occasion delay in any legal matter before any court, tribunal, or otheragency.A lawyer shall appear for trial adequately familiar with the law,the facts of the case, and the evidence to be presented. A lawyer shallalso be ready with the object and documentary evidence, as well as thejudicial affidavits of the witnesses, when required by the rules or thecourt.

SECTION 5. Prompt and objective assessment of the merits.— A lawyer shall, after reasonable inquiry, promptly give an objectiveassessment of the merits and probable results of the client’s case.A lawyer shall explain the viable options to the client to enablean informed decision regarding the matter.

SECTION 6. Duty to update the client. — A lawyer shallregularly inform the client of the status and the result of the matterundertaken, and any action in connection thereto, and shall respondwithin a reasonable time to the client’s request for information.

SECTION 7. Extension of time to file. — A lawyer shall avoidasking for an extension of time to file any pleading, motion, or othercourt submission, except when allowed by the Rules of Court or forgood cause.When an extension is obtained, the lawyer shall not let the periodlapse without submitting the pleading, motion, or other courtsubmission, except upon the client’s decision not to pursue the case anyfurther or for other justifiable cause.

SECTION 8. Lifelong learning. — A competent lawyerengages in lifelong learning through the continued development ofprofessional skills.

SECTION 9. Practice of law concurrent with anotherprofession. — A lawyer who is engaged in another profession oroccupation concurrently with the practice of law shall expresslyprovide in the pertinent contract the nature of the services the lawyer isengaged to perform.The practice of another profession or occupation shall notjeopardize such lawyer’s competence, integrity, probity, andindependence in rendering legal services.

SECTION 10. Nen-legal activities. — A lawyer who is engagedin business or other non-legal profession shall likewise observe theethical duties and responsibilities of a lawyer under the CPRA.

CANON V EQUALITY 

Every lawyer shall adhere to the principle of equality and hold firmly thebelief that every person, regardless of nationality or ethnicity, color, sexualorientation or gender identity, religion, disability, age, marital status, social oreconomic status, and other like circumstances, has the fundamental right to equaltreatment and representation.As such, the lawyer shall accord equal respect, attention, dedication and zealin advancing the client’s cause, regardless of personal opinion, religious or politicalbeliefs pertaining on the personal circumstances of the client, except for justifiablereasons.

SECTION 1. Non-discrimination. — A lawyer shall not declineto represent a person solely on account of the latter’s nationality orethnicity, sexual orientation or gender identity, religion, disability, age,marital status, social or economic status, political beliefs, or suchlawyer’s or the public’s opinion regarding the guilt of said person,except for justifiable reasons.

SECTION 2. Treatment of vulnerable persons. — In dealingwith a client who belongs to a vulnerable sector, a lawyer shall bemindful and sensitive of, and consider the client's specialcircumstances, as well as the applicable laws and rules.The lawyer shall observe a higher standard of service suited tothe particular needs of the vulnerable person and shall assert suchperson’s right to meaningful access to justice.A vulnerable person is a person who is at a higher risk of harmthan others, and shall include children, the elderly, the homeless,persons with disability, persons deprived of liberty, human rightsvictims, victims of domestic violence, victims of armed conflict, thosewho are socio-economically disadvantaged, those who belong to racialor ethnic minorities, or those with debilitating physical or mentalconditions.

SECTION 3. Indigent person. — A lawyer shall not refuse therepresentation of an indigent person, except if:(a) the lawyer is not in a position to carry out the work effectivelyor competently due to a justifiable cause;(b)the lawyer will be placed in a conflict-of-interest situation; or(c) the lawyer is related to the potential adverse party, within thesixth degree of consanguinity or affinity, or to the adversecounsel, within the fourth degree.An indigent is any person who has no money or propertysufficient for food, shelter and other basic necessities for oneself andone’s family.

SECTION 4. Standard of service. — A lawyer shall observe thesame standard of service for all clients, regardless of remuneration,except for the higher standard required for representation of vulnerablepersons. 

CANON VI

ACCOUNTABILITYBy taking the Lawyer’s Oath, a lawyer becomes a guardian of the law and anadministrator of justice. As such, the lawyer shall observe the highest degree ofmorality, adhere to rigid standards of mental fitness, and faithfully comply with therules of the legal profession.Failure to honor this covenant makes the lawyer unfit to continue in thepractice of law and accountable to society, the courts, the legal profession, and theclient.

SECTION 1. Nature of disciplinary proceedings againstlawyers. — Disciplinary proceedings against lawyers shall beconfidential in character and summary in nature.Nonetheless, the final order of the Supreme Court shall bepublished like its decisions in other cases.

SECTION 2. How instituted. — Proceedings for thedisbarment, suspension, or discipline of lawyers may be commencedby the Supreme Court on its own initiative, or upon the filing of averified complaint by the Board of Governors of the IBP, or by anyperson, before the Supreme Court or the IBP. However, a verifiedcomplaint against a government lawyer which seeks to discipline suchlawyer as a member of the Bar shall only be filed in the Supreme Court.A verified complaint filed with the Supreme Court may bereferred to the IBP for investigation, report and recommendation,except when filed directly by the IBP, in which case, the verifiedcomplaint shall be referred to the Office of the Bar Confidant or suchfact-finding body as may be designated.Complaints for disbarment, suspension and discipline filedagainst incumbent Justices of the Court of Appeals, Sandiganbayan,Court of Tax Appeals and judges of lower courts, or against lawyers inthe judicial service, whether they are charged singly or jointly withother respondents, and whether such complaint deals with actsunrelated to the discharge of their official functions, shall be forwardedby the IBP to the Supreme Court for appropriate disposition under Rule140, as amended.

SECTION 3. Contents of the complaint. — The complaint shallbe verified. It shall state clearly and concisely the acts or omissionscomplained of and shall be supported by judicial affidavits of thewitnesses and such other documents in support thereof.If the verified complaint is filed before the IBP, six (6) copiesthereof shall be filed with the Secretary of the IBP or the Secretary ofany of its chapters, who shall forthwith transmit the same to the IBPBoard of Governors.

SECTION 4. List of Investigating Commissioners;qualifications. — The IBP shall recommend to the Supreme Court onehundred fifty (150) lawyers in good standing and repute, whom the IBPshall proportionately select from its nine (9) regions. The IBP mayperiodically recommend the adjustment of the number of InvestigatingCommissioners to the Supreme Court according to the existingcaseload.

The list, with the curriculum vitae of the recommended lawyers, shall be submitted by the IBP within a month from the effectivity of the Code.Only those approved by the Supreme Court may be designated as Investigating Commissioners, who shall serve for a term of three (3) years, unless sooner removed, replaced or resigned.An updated list shall be submitted by the IBP to the Supreme Court upon removal, replacement, or resignation of a lawyer previously designated as Investigating Commissioner by the Supreme Court.All approved Investigating Commissioners shall take an oath of office in the form prescribed by the IBP. A copy of the Investigating Commissioner’s appointment and oath shall be transmitted to the Supreme Court.

SECTION 5. Assignment by raffle of InvestigatingCommissioner. — The IBP Board of Governors shall assign by rafflean Investigating Commissioner from among the lawyers approved bythe Supreme Court in the list submitted by the IBP or, when specialcircumstances so warrant, a panel of three (3) InvestigatingCommissioners, to investigate the complaint.

SECTION 6. Complaint against a government lawyer. —When a complaint is filed against a government lawyer, theInvestigating Commissioner shall determine, within five (5) calendardays from assignment by raffle, whether the concerned agency, theOmbudsman, or the Supreme Court has jurisdiction. If the allegationsin the complaint touch upon the lawyer’s continuing obligations underthe CPRA or if the allegations, assuming them to be true, make thelawyer unfit to practice the profession, then the InvestigatingCommissioner shall proceed with the case. Otherwise, the InvestigatingCommissioner shall recommend that the complaint be dismissed.

SECTION 7. Disqualification of Investigating Commissioner.— An Investigating Commissioner shall, on his or her own initiative orupon motion, recuse from acting as such on the grounds of relationshipwithin the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity with any of theparties or their counsel, professional legal relationship, pecuniaryinterest, or where he or she has acted as counsel] for either party, unless,in the last instance, the parties sign and enter upon the record theirwritten consent.Where an Investigating Commissioner does not disqualifyhimself or herself, a party may file the appropriate motion fordisqualification before the IBP Board of Governors. The IBP Board ofGovernors shall resolve the motion within five (5) calendar days fromreceipt thereof. Upon vote of majority of the members present, therebeing a quorum, the IBP Board of Governors shall order thedisqualification and designate a replace of the disqualified InvestigatingCommissioner. The decision of the IBP Board of Governors on thedisqualification shall be final.

SECTION 8. Duties of the Investigating Commissioner. — TheInvestigating Commissioner shall investigate a complaint against anymember of the Integrated Bar, and thereafter submit a report embodyingthe recommended action to the IBP Board of Governors, within a totalperiod not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) calendar days, fromassignment by raffle.

SECTION 9. Submissions allowed; verification. — The onlysubmissions allowed are the complaint, answer, and position papers, allof which shall be verified.A Certificate of Non-Forum Shopping shall accompany theverified complaint.An unverified complaint shall be recommended for outrightdismissal. = An unverified answer or position paper shall not beconsidered.

SECTION 10. Prohibited submissions. — The followingsubmissions are prohibited:(a) Motion to dismiss the complaint or petition, except on theground of lack of jurisdiction, litis pendentia or resJudicata,(by Motion for a bill of particulars;(¢) Motion to reopen or for new trial;(d) Petition for relief from judgment;(e) Supplemental pleadings;(f) Motion for reconsideration of a judgment on the merits,except a motion for reconsideration of an interlocutoryorder or resolution.

SECTION 11. Lack of prima facie showing of liability;outright dismissal. — Within fifteen (15) calendar days fromassignment by raffle, if the Investigating Commissioner finds no primafacie showing of liability, the Investigating Commissioner shallrecommend the outright dismissal of the complaint to the SupremeCourt. The Supreme Court may adopt the recommendation and dismissthe complaint outright. Otherwise, the Supreme Court shall direct theInvestigating Commissioner to conduct further proceedings.

SECTION 12. Effect of death of lawyer on administrativedisciplinary cases. — Disciplinary proceedings may not be institutedagainst a lawyer who has died. If such proceedings have been institutednotwithstanding the lawyer’s death, the administrative case against saidlawyer shall be dismissed.The death of the lawyer during the pendency of the case shallcause its dismissal.

SECTION 13. Issuance of summons. — Within fifteen (15)calendar days from assignment by raffle, the InvestigatingCommissioner shall issue the required summons, attaching thereto acopy of the verified complaint and supporting documents, if any. ‘Thesummons shall require the respondent to file a verified answer.

SECTION 14. Verified answer. — The answer shall be verifiedand filed within thirty (30) calendar days from receipt of the summons.The verified answer shall be accompanied by judicial affidavits of thewitnesses and such other documents in support thereof.The respondent may, upon motion, for good cause, be given oneextension of fifteen (15) calendar days to file the verified answer.Two (2) copies of the verified answer shall be filed with theInvestigating Commissioner, with proof of service on the complainantor the latter’s counsel.

SECTION 15. Dismissal after answer. —- If the InvestigatingCommissioner finds that the complaint is not meritorious based on theverified answer, the Investigating Commissioner shall recommend tothe Supreme Court the dismissal of the complaint. Otherwise, the Supreme Court shall direct the Investigating Commissioner to conductfurther proceedings.

SECTION 16. Irrelevance. of desistance, settlement,compromise, restitution, withdrawal, or failure to prosecute. — Noinvestigation shall be interrupted or terminated by reason of thedesistance, settlement, compromise, restitution, withdrawal of thecharges, or failure of the complainant to prosecute the same.

SECTION 17. Counsel de officio. — The IBP Board ofGovernors shall appoint a suitable member of the Integrated Bar ascounsel de officio to assist the complainant or the respondent during theinvestigation in case of need for such assistance.

SECTION 18. Investigation. — Upon joinder of issues or uponfailure of the respondent to answer, the Investigating Commissionershall proceed with the investigation of the case. However, if despitereasonable notice, the respondent fails to file an answer or appear, theinvestigation shall proceed ex parte. In both instances, the investigationshall proceed with dispatch.The respondent shall be given full opportunity to defend and beheard, whether through counsel or not, and to present witnesses.The Investigating Commissioner shall have the power to issuesubpoenae and administer oaths and affirmations in relation to theconduct of the proceedings.

SECTION 19. Indirect contempt. -— Willful failure or refusalto obey a subpoena or any other lawful order issued by the InvestigatingCommissioner shall be dealt with as indirect contempt of court. TheInvestigating Commissioner shall require the alleged contemnor toshow cause within ten (10) calendar days from notice. Upon receipt ofthe compliance or lapse of the period to comply, the InvestigatingCommissioner may conduct a hearing, if necessary, in accordance withthe procedure set forth under Canon VI, Section 22 for hearings beforethe Investigating Commissioner. Such hearing shall be terminatedwithin fifteen (15) calendar days from commencement. Thereafter, theInvestigating Commissioner shall submit a report and recommendationto the IBP Board of Governors within a period of fifteen (15) calendardays from termination of the contempt hearing.Within thirty (30) calendar days from receipt of the InvestigatingCommissioner’s report and recommendation on the contempt charge,the IBP Board of Governors, through a Resolution, may either adopt, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the InvestigatingCommissioner. The action of the IBP Board of Governors shall beimmediately executoty.The action of the IBP Board of Governors may be appealed tothe Supreme Court. The execution of the order of contempt shall notbe suspended, unless a bond is filed by the person adjudged incontempt, in an amount fixed by the IBP Board of Governors,conditioned upon compliance with and performance of the final actionin the contempt case, if decided against the contemnor.

SECTION 20. Submission of preliminary conference briefs. —Immediately upon receipt of the verified answer, the InvestigatingCommissioner shall send a notice to the parties and counsels tosimultaneously file, within a non-extendible period of ten (10) calendardays from receipt of the notice, their respective preliminary conferencebriefs which shall contain the following:(a) Admissions;(b) Stipulation of facts;(¢) Definition of issues;(d) Judicial affidavits and marked exhibits, accompanied bythe lawyer’s certification that the attached documents arethe genuine or faithful reproductions of the original in hisor her custody or possession;(e) Such other matters as may aid in the prompt disposition ofthe action.

SECTION 21. Preliminary conference order; position papers.— Within ten (10) calendar days from receipt of the preliminaryconference briefs, the Investigating Commissioner shall issue aPreliminary Conference Order, on the basis of such briefs submitted bythe parties and counsels, summarizing the stipulated facts, issues andmarked exhibits.The Investigating Commissioner shall further direct the partiesto submit their verified position papers within a non-extendible periodof ten (10) calendar days from receipt of the preliminary conferenceorder.

SECTION 22. Clarificatory hearing. — Within ten (10)calendar days from receipt of the last position paper, the InvestigatingCommissioner shall determine whether there is a need to conduct ahearing to clarify factual issues and confront witnesses.If deemed necessary, the Investigating Commissioner shall setthe hearing within fifteen (15) calendar days from such determination,and identify the factual issues to be made subject of the hearing.The Investigating Commissioner may subpoena any witness toappear at the hearing to answer clarificatory questions. Thereafter, theInvestigating Commissioner may allow the parties to confront thewitnesses and propound their own clarificatory questions on the factualissues identified by the Investigating Commissioner.The clarificatory hearing may be done in-person or throughvideoconferencing. If it is conducted in-person, the clarificatoryhearing shall be done at the most convenient venue for the parties.The clarificatory hearing shall be terminated within thirty (30)calendar days from its commencement.

SECTION 23. Minutes of proceedings. — The proceedingsbefore the IBP shall be recorded.

SECTION 24. Non-appearance of parties. — Non-appearanceat the clarificatory hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right toparticipate therein.

SECTION 25. Issuance of report and recommendation by theInvestigating Commissioner. — If there is no clarificatory hearing, theInvestigating Commissioner shall render a report and recommendationand submit the same to the IBP Board of Governors within a non-extendible period of sixty (60) calendar days from receipt of the lastposition paper or lapse of the period given.In case the Investigating Commissioner sets a clarificatoryhearing, the report and recommendation shall be rendered andsubmitted to the IBP Board of Governors within a non-extendibleperiod of thirty (30) calendar days from the termination of the hearing.The report and recommendation shall be accompanied by theduly certified transcript of stenographic notes, or in lieu thereof, theaudio recording, if any, or the Investigating Commissioner’s personal notes duly signed, which should be attached to the records, togetherwith the evidence presented during the investigation. The submissionof the report need not await the transcription of the stenographic notes,it being sufficient that the report reproduce substantially from theInvestigating Commissioner’s personal notes any relevant and pertinenttestimonies.If the hearing is conducted through videoconferencing, theproceedings shall be recorded by the Investigating Commissioner. Itshall form part of the records of the case, appending thereto relevantelectronic documents taken up or issued during the hearing.

SECTION 26. Submission of resolution by the Board ofGovernors. — The IBP Board of Governors shall have a non-extendibleperiod of ninety (90) calendar days from receipt of the Report andRecommendation of the Investigating Commissioner, within which tosubmit to the Supreme Court its Resolution adopting, modifying ordisapproving such Report and Recommendation.

SECTION 27. Depositions. — Depositions may be taken inaccordance with the Rules of Civil Procedure, as amended, with leaveof the Investigating Commissioner.

SECTION 28. Filing and service. — The filing and the serviceof papers or notices required by this Canon shall be made with theCommission, or upon the parties personally, by registered mail,accredited courier, electronic mail or other electronic means, or asprovided for in international conventions to which the Philippines is a party.For this purpose, the office address and the electronic mailaddress supplied by the lawyer to the IBP shall be the official addressesto which all notices, orders and processes shall be served.Proof of filing and service shall be submitted in accordance withthe Rules of Civil Procedure, as amended.

SECTION 29. Substantial defects; motion to reopen. — Anysubstantial defect in the complaint, notice, answer, or in the proceedingor the Investigating Commissioner’s Report which may result in themiscarriage of justice may be raised as an error before the SupremeCourt, unless the defect results in the deprivation of the right to dueprocess. In case of the latter, the matter may be brought before the IBPBoard of Governors by way of a motion to reopen within sixty (60)calendar days from knowledge.

SECTION 30. Proceedings initiated before the Supreme Court.— In proceedings initiated by the Supreme Court, or proceedingscommenced by complaint filed with the Supreme Court, the SupremeCourt may refer the case for investigation, report and recommendationto the Office of the Bar Confidant, or the IBP, or other fact-finding bodythat is designated or created by the Supreme Court for such purpose.Cases referred to the Office of the Bar Confidant, or other fact-finding body, or the IBP shall proceed in the same manner provided inSections 5 to 29 of this Canon.In any event, the report and recommendation on the investigationshall be reviewed directly by the Supreme Court, which shall take suchnecessary action on the report and recommendation as may bewarranted.

SECTION 31. Preventive suspension. — After receipt ofrespondent’s answer or lapse of the period therefor, the Supreme Court,on its own initiative, or upon the recommendation of the IBP Board ofGovernors, the Office of the Bar Confidant, or the fact-finding bodyreferred to in Section 30, may suspend a lawyer from the practice oflaw during the pendency of the investigation for a period not exceedingone hundred eighty (180) calendar days or until such suspension islified by the Supreme Court, in order to prevent interference with orobstruction of the investigation, tampering, concealment or destructionof evidence, intimidating or exerting undue influence on any witness.

SECTION 32. Quantum and burden of proof. — Inadministrative disciplinary cases, the complainant has the burden ofproof to establish with substantial evidence the allegations against therespondent. Substantial evidence is that amount of relevant evidencewhich a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to justify aconclusion.

SECTION 33. Serious offenses. — Serious offenses include:(a) Gross misconduct, or any inexcusable, shameful orflagrant unlawful conduct;(b) Serious dishonesty, fraud, or deceit, including falsificationof documents and making untruthful statements;(c) Bribery or corruption;(d) Gross negligence in the performance of duty, or conductthat is reckless and inexcusable, which results in the clientbeing deprived of his or her day in court;(e) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude;(f)  Grossly immoral conduct, or an act that is so corrupt orfalse as to constitute a criminal act, or so immoral as to bereprehensible to a high degree;(2) Misappropriating a client’s funds or properties;(h) Gross ignorance of the law or procedure, or the disregardof basic rules and settled jurisprudence, when either isattended by bad faith, malice, or corrupt motive;(i)  Grossly undignified conduct prejudicial to theadministration of justice;(j) Sexual abuse;(k)  Gender-based sexual harassment or discrimination;(I) Open defiance to any order of the court, tribunal, or othergovernment agency,(m) Threat of physical or economic harm, amounting to acrime, directed at a fellow lawyer, the latter's client orprincipal, a witness, or any official or employee of a court,tribunal, or other government agency;(n) Willful and deliberate forum shopping, and forumshopping through gross negligence;(0) Intentional violation of the rule on privilegedcommunication;(p) Violation of the notarial rules, except reportorialrequirements, when attended by bad faith;(q) Intentional violation of the conflict of interest rules;(r)  Influence-peddling or using one’s relationships to obtain afavorable action on, or outcome in, any pending matter orproceeding, directly or indirectly, with or withoutmonetary consideration, from any officer of a court,tribunal or other government agency;(s) Unlawful discrimination under Canon V; and(t) Sale, distribution, possession and/or use of illegal drugs orsubstances.

SECTION 34. Less serious offenses. — Less serious offensesinclude:(a) Simple misconduct, or such misconduct without themanifest elements of corruption, clear intent to violate thelaw or flagrant disregard of established rules;(b) Simple negligence in the performance of duty, or suchnegligence which does not result in depriving the client ofhis or her day in court;(¢) Violation of Supreme Court rules and issuances in relationto Bar Matters and administrative disciplinaryproceedings, including willful and deliberate disobedienceof the orders of the Supreme Court and the IBP;(d) Simple dishonesty;(e) Other violations of the conflict of interest rules;(f) Prohibited borrowing of money from a client;(g) Prohibited lending of money;(h) Other unlawful threats;(i)  Instituting frivolous or baseless actions, on the basis of afinal decision or order dismissing such action for beingfrivolous or baseless;(j) Violation of the sub judice rule;Deliberate failure or refusal to pay just debts;Termination of legal services absent good cause andwritten notice;Use of intemperate or offensive language before any court,tribunal, or other government agency,Unjustifiable failure or refusal to render an accounting ofthe funds or properties of a client;Unauthorized division of fees with a non-lawyer; andOther violations of reportorial requirements.

SECTION 35. Light offenses. — Light offenses include:a Violation of IBP rules and issuances governingb membership in the IBP;c Use of vulgar or offensive language in personal dealings;d Fraternizing with the officials or employees of a court,tribunal, or other government agency where therespondent has a pending case or cases, to such a degreeand frequency as would give the appearance of power orinfluence over them, or which tends to create animpression of impropriety;e Filing of frivolous motions for inhibition;f Failure to promptly call upon client to rectify a fraudulentact; org Other similar or analogous infractions of the CPRA.

SECTION 36. Assisting in the commission of an offense. —Any lawyer who shall knowingly assist another lawyer in thecommission of any serious, less serious, or light offense punished bythe CPRA may also be held liable.

SECTION 37. Sanctions. —(a) If the respondent is found guilty of a serious offense, anyof the following sanctions, or a combination thereof, shallbe imposed:(1) Disbarment;(2) Suspension from the practice of law for a periodexceeding six (6) months;(3) Revocation of notarial commission anddisqualification as notary public for not less thantwo (2) years; or(4) A fine exceeding P100,000.00.(b) If the respondent is found guilty of a less serious offense,any of the following sanctions, or a combination thereof,shall be imposed:(1) Suspension from the practice of law for a periodwithin the range of one (1) month to six (6) months,or revocation of notarial commission anddisqualification as notary public for less than two(2) years;(2) A fine within the range of P35,000.00 toP100,000.00.(c) If the respondent is found guilty of a light offense, any ofthe following sanctions shall be imposed:(1) A fine within the range of P1,000.00 to P35,000.00;(2) Censure; or(3) Reprimand.In addition to the above sanctions in paragraph (c),the respondent may also be required to docommunity service or service in the IBP legal aidprogram."In all instances, when the offense involves money or propertyowed, which is intrinsically linked to the lawyer-client relationship, therespondent shall be ordered to return the same.

SECTION 38. Modifying circumstances. — In determining theappropriate penalty to be imposed, the Court may, in its discretion,appreciate the following mitigating and aggravating circumstances:(a) Mitigating circumstances:(1) First offense, except in charges of grossmisconduct, bribery or corruption, grossly immoralconduct, misappropriating a client’s funds orproperties, sexual abuse, and sale, distribution,possession and/or use of illegal drugs or substances;(2) Absence of bad faith or malice;(3) Return of the amounts owed;(4) Expression of remorse;(5) Reconciliation with the complainant;(6) Rectification of wrongdoing;(7) Act or omission did not prejudice the client;(8) Age;(9) Number of years in the practice of law;(10) Humanitarian considerations; and(11) Other analogous circumstances.(b)  Aggravating Circumstances:(1) Finding of previous administrative liability where apenalty is imposed, regardless of nature or gravity;(2) Age;(3) Number of years in the practice of law;(4) Employment of fraudulent means to conceal theoffense;(5) Respondent’s act or omission was tainted with badfaith or malice, except when it is an element of theoffense;(6) Lack of remorse;(7) Failure to comply with the orders of the Court andthe IBP in relation to an administrative case; and(8) Other analogous circumstances.

SECTION 39. Manner of imposition. — If one (1) or moreaggravating circumstances and no mitigating circumstances are present,the Supreme Court may impose the penalties of suspension or fine fora period or amount not exceeding double of the maximum prescribedunder this Rule. The Supreme Court may, in its discretion, impose thepenalty of disbarment depending on the number and gravity of theaggravating circumstances.If one (1) or more mitigating circumstances and no aggravatingcircumstances are present, the Supreme Court may impose the penaltiesof suspensicn or fine for a period or amount not less than half of theminimum prescribed under the CPRA.If there are both aggravating and mitigating circumstancespresent, the Supreme Court may offset each other.

SECTION 40. Penalty for multiple offenses. — If therespondent is found liable for more than one (1) offense arising fromseparate acts or omissions in a single administrative proceeding, theCourt shall impose separate penalties for each offense. Should theaggregate of the imposed penalties exceed five (5) years of suspensionfrom the practice of law or P1,000,000.00 in fines, the respondent may,in the discretion of the Supreme Court, be meted with the penalty ofdisbarment.If a single act or omission gives rise to more than one (1) offense,the respondent shall still be found liable for all such offenses, but shall,nonetheless, only be meted with the appropriate penalty for the mostserious offense.

SECTION 41. Payment of fines and return of client’s moneyand property. — When the penalty imposed is a fine or the respondentis ordered to return the client’s money or property, the respondent shallpay or return it within a period not exceeding three (3) months fromreceipt of the decision or resolution. If unpaid or unreturned, the Courtmay cite the respondent in indirect contempt,

SECTION 42. Penalty when the respondent has beenpreviously disbarred. — When the respondent has been previouslydisbarred and is subsequently found guilty of a new charge, the Courtmay impose a fine or order the disbarred lawyer to return the money orproperty to the client, when proper. If the new charge deserves thepenalty of a disbarment or suspension from the practice of law, it shallnot be imposed but the penalty shall be recorded in the personal file ofthe disbarred lawyer in the Office of the Bar Confidant or other officedesignated for the purpose. In the event that the disbarred lawyerapplies for judicial clemency, the penalty so recorded shall beconsidered in the resolution of the same.

SECTION 43. Immediately executory; furnished copies. —The decision or resolution pronouncing the respondent’s administrativeliability is immediately executory. The copies of the decision orresolution shall be furnished to the Office of the Bar Confidant, the IBPNational Office and local chapter to which the respondent belongs, andthe Office of the Court Administrator for circulation to all the courts.

SECTION 44. Confidentiality. — Proceedings against lawyersshall be confidential. However, the final order of the Supreme Courtshall be published like its decisions in other cases.

SECTION 45. Sworn statement after service of suspension. —Upon the expiration of the period of suspension from the practice oflaw, the lawyer shall file a Sworn Statement with the Supreme Court,through the Office of the Bar Confidant, to show that the petitioner,during the period of suspension:(a) has not appeared before any court, tribunal or othergovernment agency, whether in respect of current, formeror prospective clients;(b) has not signed or filed any pleading or other courtsubmission;(c) has duly informed his or her clients, law firm, [aw schoolwhere the lawyer is teaching, legal clinic, or other legalservice organization of which he or she is a member,regarding the suspension; and(d) has not otherwise performed any act, directly or indirectly,that amounts to the practice of law.The Sworn Statement shall state the date of the lawyer’s receiptof the order, decision or resolution imposing the penalty of suspension,as well as a list of the lawyer’s engagements affected by the suspension,indicating the relevant court, tribunal or other government agency, ifany.Copies of the Sworn Statement shall be furnished to the LocalChapter of the IBP, to the Executive Judge of the courts where thesuspended lawyer has pending cases handled by him or her, and/orwhere he or she has appeared as counsel.

SECTION 46. Resumption of practice of law. — The SwornStatement shall be considered as proof of the suspended lawyer’scompliance with the order of suspension. Such lawyer shall be allowedto resume the practice of law upon the filing of the Sworn Statementbefore the Supreme Court.However, any false statement in the Sworn Statement shall be aground for a complaint for disbarment.Within five (5) days from the filing of the Sworn Statement andthe Office of the Bar Confidant determines that there is a false statementstated therein, it shall refer the same to the Court for its immediateaction.

SECTION 47. Reinstatement in the Roll of Attorneys. — Alawyer who has been disbarred may file a verified petition for judicialclemency after five (5) years from the receipt of the order, decision, orresolution of disbarment.

SECTION 48. Petition for judicial clemency. — The verifiedpetition for judicial clemency shall allege the following:(a) that the verified petition was filed after five (5) years fromthe receipt of the order, decision, or resolution ofdisbarment;(b) thatthe disbarred lawyer has fully complied with the termsand conditions of all prior disciplinary orders, includingorders for restitution;(¢) that he or she recognizes the wrongfulness and seriousnessof the misconduct for which he or she was disbarred byshowing positive acts evidencing reformation;(d) that he or she has reconciled, or attempted in good faith toreconcile, with the wronged private offended party in thedisbarment case, or if the same is not possible, anexplanation as to why such attempt at reconciliation couldnot be made.Where there is no private offended party, the plea forclemency must contain a public apology; and(e) notwithstanding the conduct for which the disbarredlawyer was disciplined, he or she has the requisite goodmoral character and competence.Any of the following allegations may also be made in support ofthe petition:(a) that he or she still has productive years that can be put togood use if given a chance; or(b) there is a showing of promise (such as intellectualaptitude, learning or legal acumen or contribution to legalscholarship and the development of the legal system oradministrative and other relevant skills), as well aspotential for public service.

SECTION 49. Action on the petition for judicial clemency;prima facie merit. — Upon receipt of the petition, the Supreme Courtshall conduct a preliminary evaluation and determine if the same hasprima facie merit based on the criteria.If the petition has prima facie merit, the Supreme Court shallrefer the petition to the Office of the Bar Confidant or any fact-finding body the Court so designates for investigation, report andrecommendation.If the petition fails to show any prima facie merit, it shall bedenied outright.

SECTION 50. Investigation by the Office of the Bar Confidantor other fact-finding body. — The Office of the Bar Confidant or anyother fact-finding body designated shall conduct and terminate theinvestigation and submit to the Supreme Court its report andrecommendation within ninety (90) calendar days from receipt of thereferral.

SECTION 51. Decision on the petition for judicial clemency;quantum of evidence. — The Supreme Court shall decide the petitionon the basis of clear and convincing evidence.

SECTION 52. Prohibition against employment of disbarred orsuspended lawyer. — A lawyer who has been disbarred or suspendedshall not be employed or engaged in the practice of law, including theperformance of the following acts:(a) Providing legal consultation or advice;(b) Appearing on behalf of a client in any hearing orproceeding before any court, tribunal, or other governmentagency or office;(c) Appearing as a representative of a client at a deposition orother discovery matter;(d) Negotiating or transacting any legal matter for or on behalfof a client with third parties;(e) Receiving, disbursing, or otherwise handling a client’sfunds;(f) Teaching law subjects in any educational institution; or(g) Acting and being commissioned as a Notary Public.A suspended lawyer shall immediately cease and desist from thepractice of law until the suspension is lifted by the Supreme Court.Any client previously represented by a suspended lawyer mayengage the services of a new lawyer.The disbarment or suspension of a handling lawyer shall notterminate the lawyer-client engagement between the client and the lawfirm, unless the client chooses otherwise.

SECTION 53. Costs. — All reasonable and necessary expensesincurred in relation to disciplinary and disbarment proceedings arelawful charges for which the parties may be taxed as costs, subject toproof.REVISED LAWYER'S OATHI, (name), do solemnly swear (affirm) that I accept the honor,privilege, duty, and responsibility of practicing law in the Philippinesas an Officer of the Court in the interest of our people.I declare fealty to the Constitution of the Republic of Philippines.In doing so, I shall work towards promoting the rule of law anda regime of truth, justice, freedom, love, equality, and peace.I shall conscientiously and courageously work for justice, as wellas safeguard the rights and meaningful freedoms of all persons,identities and communities. I shall ensure greater and equitable accessto justice. I shall do no falsehood nor shall I pervert the law to unjustlyfavor nor prejudice anyone. I shall faithfully discharge these duties andresponsibilities to the best of my ability, with integrity, and utmostcivility. I impose all these upon myself without mental reservation norpurpose of evasion.So help me, God.GENERAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 1. Transitory provision. — The CPRA shall beapplied to all pending and future cases, except to the extent that in theopinion of the Supreme Court, its retroactive application would not be feasible or would work injustice, in which case the procedure underwhich the cases were filed shall govern.

SECTION 2. Repealing clause. — The Code of ProfessionalResponsibility of 1988, Sections 20 to 37 of Rule 138, and Rule 139-Bof the Rules of Court are repealed.The Lawyer’s Oath, as found in Rule 138 of the Rules of Court,is amended and superseded.Any resolution, circular, bar matter, or administrative orderissued by or principles established in the decisions of the SupremeCourt inconsistent with the CPRA are deemed modified or repealed.

SECTION 3. Effectivity clause. — The CPRA shall take effectfifteen (15) calendar days after its publication in the Official Gazette orany newspaper of general circulation.