
CHAPTER THREE

Illegal Assemblies and Associations

ARTICLE 146. Illegal Assemblies. — The penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum and medium periods and a fine not exceeding 1,000 pesos shall be imposed upon the organizers or leaders of any meeting attended by armed persons for the purpose of committing any of the crimes punishable under this Code, or of any meeting in which the audience is incited to the commission of the crime of treason, rebellion or insurrection, sedition, or assault upon a person in authority or his agents. Persons merely present at such meeting shall suffer the penalty of arresto mayor.

ARTICLE 147. Illegal Associations. — The penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum and medium periods and a fine not exceeding 1,000 pesos shall be imposed upon the founders, directors, and presidents of associations totally or partially organized for the purpose of committing any of the crimes punishable under this Code or for some purpose contrary to public morals. Mere members of said associations shall suffer the penalty of arresto mayor.

CHAPTER FOUR

Assault Upon, and Resistance and Disobedience to Persons in Authority and Their Agents

ARTICLE 148. Direct Assaults. — Any person or persons who, without a public uprising, shall employ force or intimidation for the attainment of any of the purposes enumerated in defining the crimes of rebellion and sedition, or shall attack, employ force or seriously intimidate or resist any person in authority or any of his agents, while engaged in the performance of official duties, or on occasion of such performance, shall suffer the penalty of prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods and a fine not exceeding 1,000 pesos, when the assault is committed with a weapon or when the offender is a public officer or employee, or when the offender lays hands upon a person in authority. If none of these circumstances be present, the penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum period and a fine not exceeding 500 pesos shall be imposed.

ARTICLE 149. Indirect Assaults. — The penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum and medium periods and a fine not exceeding 500 pesos shall be imposed upon any person who shall make use of force or intimidation upon any person coming to the aid of the authorities or their agents on occasion of the commission of any of the crimes defined in the next preceding article.

ARTICLE 150. Disobedience to Summons Issued by a Legislative Body or Committee, and Refusal to Testify Before Same. — The penalty of arresto mayor or a fine ranging from 200 to 1,000 pesos, or both such fine and imprisonment, shall be imposed upon any person who, having been duly summoned to attend as a witness before either House of the legislature, or before any committee thereof, refuses, without legal excuse, to obey such summons, or being present before any such body or committee, refuses to be sworn or placed under affirmation or to answer any legal inquiry or to produce any books, papers, documents, or records in his possession, when required by them to do so in the exercise of their functions.

ARTICLE 151. Resistance and Disobedience to a Person in Authority or the Agents of Such Person. — The penalty of arresto mayor and a fine not exceeding 500 pesos shall be imposed upon any person who not being included in the provisions of the preceding articles shall resist or seriously disobey any person in authority, or the agents of such person, while engaged in the performance of official duties.

When the disobedience to an agent of a person in authority is not of a serious nature, the penalty of arresto menor or a fine ranging from 10 to 100 pesos shall be imposed upon the offender.

ARTICLE 152. Persons in Authority — Who Shall Be Deemed as Such. — In applying the provisions of the preceding and other articles of this Code, any person directly vested with jurisdiction, whether as an individual or as a member of some court or governmental corporation, board or commission, shall be deemed a person in authority.

CHAPTER FIVE

Public Disorders

ARTICLE 153. Tumults and Other Disturbances of Public Orders — Tumultuous Disturbance or Interruption Liable to Cause Disturbance. — The penalty of arresto mayor in its medium period to prision correccional in its minimum period and a fine not exceeding 1,000 pesos shall be imposed upon any person who shall cause any serious disturbance in a public place, office, or establishment, or shall interrupt or disturb public performances, functions or gatherings, or peaceful meetings, if the act is not included in the provisions of articles 131 and 132.

The penalty next higher in degree shall be imposed upon persons causing any disturbance or interruption of a tumultuous character.

The disturbance or interruption shall be deemed to be tumultuous if caused by more than three persons who are armed or provided with means of violence.

The penalty of arresto mayor shall be imposed upon any person who in any meeting, association, or public place, shall make any outcry tending to incite rebellion or sedition or in such place shall display placards or emblems which provoke a disturbance of the public order.

The penalty of arresto menor and a fine not to exceed 200 pesos shall be imposed upon those persons who in violation of the provisions contained in the last clause of article 85 shall bury with pomp the body of a person who has been legally executed.

ARTICLE 154. Unlawful Use of Means of Publication. — The penalty of arresto mayor or a fine ranging from 200 to 1,000 pesos shall be imposed upon:

1. Any person who by means of printing, lithography, or any other means of publication, shall maliciously publish as news any false news which may endanger the public order or cause damage to the interest or credit of the State;

2. Any person who by the same means, shall encourage disobedience to the law or to the constituted authorities or praise, justify or extol any act punished by law;

3. Any person who shall maliciously publish any official resolution or document without proper authority, or before they have been published officially; or

4. Any person who shall print or publish books, pamphlets, periodicals, or leaflets which do not bear the real printer’s name.

ARTICLE 155. Alarms and Scandals. — The penalty of arresto menor or fine not exceeding 200 pesos shall be imposed upon:

1. Any person who within any town or public place, shall discharge any firearm, rocket, firecracker, or other explosives calculated to cause alarm or danger;

2. Any person who shall instigate or take an active part in any charivari or other disorderly meeting offensive to another or prejudicial to public tranquility;

3. Any person who, while wandering about at night or while engaged in any other nocturnal amusements, shall disturb the public peace; or

4. Any person who, while intoxicated or otherwise, shall cause any disturbance or scandal in public places, provided that the circumstances of the case shall not make the provisions of article 153 applicable.

ARTICLE 156. Delivery of Prisoners from Jail. — The penalty of arresto mayor in its maximum period to prisión correccional in its minimum period shall be imposed upon any person who shall remove from any jail or penal establishment any person confined therein or shall help the escape of such person, by means of violence, intimidation, or bribery. If other means are used the penalty of arresto mayor shall be imposed.

If the escape of the prisoner shall take place outside of said establishments by taking the guards by surprise, the same penalties shall be imposed in their minimum period.

CHAPTER SIX

Evasion of Service of Sentence

ARTICLE 157. Evasion of Service of Sentence. — The penalty of prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods shall be imposed upon any convict who shall evade service of his sentence by escaping during the term of his imprisonment by reason of final judgment. However, if such evasion or escape shall have taken place by means of unlawful entry, by breaking doors, windows, grates, walls, roofs, or floors, or by using picklocks, false keys, disguise, deceit, violence or intimidation, or through connivance with other convicts or employees of the penal institution, the penalty shall be prisión correccional in its maximum period.

ARTICLE 158. Evasion of Service of Sentence on the Occasion of Disorders, Conflagrations, Earthquakes, or Other Calamities. — A convict who shall evade the service of his sentence, by leaving the penal institution where he shall have been confined, on the occasion of disorder resulting from a conflagration, earthquake, explosion, or similar catastrophe, or during a mutiny in which he has not participated, shall suffer an increase of one-fifth of the time still remaining to be served under the original sentence, which in no case shall exceed six months, if he shall fail to give himself up to the authorities within forty-eight hours following the issuance of a proclamation by the Chief Executive announcing the passing away of such calamity.

Convicts who, under the circumstances mentioned in the preceding paragraph, shall give themselves up to the authorities within the above mentioned period of 48 hours, shall be entitled to the deduction provided in article 98.

ARTICLE 159. Other Cases of Evasion of Service of Sentence. — The penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum period shall be imposed upon the convict who, having been granted conditional pardon by the Chief Executive, shall violate any of the conditions of such pardon. However, if the penalty remitted by the granting of such pardon be higher than six years, the convict shall then suffer the unexpired portion of his original sentence.

CHAPTER SEVEN

Commission of Another Crime During Service of Penalty Imposed for Another Previous Offense

ARTICLE 160. Commission of Another Crime During Service of Penalty Imposed for Another Previous Offense — Penalty. — Besides the provisions of rule 5 of article 62, any person who shall commit a felony after having been convicted by final judgment, before beginning to serve such sentence, or while serving the same, shall be punished by the maximum period of the penalty prescribed by law for the new felony.

Any convict of the class referred to in this article, who is not a habitual criminal, shall be pardoned at the age of seventy years if he shall have already served out his original sentence, or when he shall complete it after reaching said age, unless by reason of his conduct or other circumstances he shall not be worthy of such clemency.

TITLE FOUR

Crimes Against Public Interest

CHAPTER ONE

Forgeries

SECTION ONE

Forging the Seal of the Government of the Philippine Islands, the Signature or Stamp of the Chief Executive

ARTICLE 161. Counterfeiting the Great Seal of the Government of the Philippine Islands, Forging the Signature or Stamp of the Chief Executive. — The penalty of reclusión temporal shall be imposed upon any person who shall forge the Great Seal of the Government of the Philippine Islands or the signature or stamp of the Chief Executive.

ARTICLE 162. Using Forged Signature or Counterfeit Seal or Stamp. — The penalty of prisión mayor shall be imposed upon any person who shall knowingly make use of the counterfeit seal or forged signature or stamp mentioned in the preceding article.

SECTION TWO

Counterfeiting Coins

ARTICLE 163. Making and Importing and Uttering False Coins. — Any person who makes, imports, or utters false coins, in connivance with counterfeiters or importers, shall suffer:

1. Prisión mayor in its minimum and medium periods and a fine not to exceed 10,000 pesos, if the counterfeited coin be gold or silver coin of the United States or of the Philippine Islands.

2. Prisión correccional in its minimum and medium periods and a fine of not to exceed 2,000 pesos, if the counterfeited coin be any of the minor coinage of the United States or of the Philippine Islands.

3. Prisión correccional in its minimum period and a fine not to exceed 1,000 pesos, if the counterfeited coin be currency of a foreign country.

ARTICLE 164. Mutilation of Coins — Importation and Utterance of Mutilated Coins. — The penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum period and a fine not to exceed 2,000 pesos shall be imposed upon any person who shall mutilate coins of the legal currency of the United States or of the Philippine Islands or import or utter mutilated current coins, or in connivance with mutilators or importers.

ARTICLE 165. Selling of False or Mutilated Coin, Without Connivance. — Any person who knowingly, although without the connivance mentioned in the preceding articles, shall possess false or mutilated coin with intent to utter the same, or shall actually utter such coin, shall suffer a penalty lower by one degree than that prescribed in said articles.

SECTION THREE

Forging Treasury or Bank Notes, Obligations and Securities; Importing and Uttering False or Forged Notes, Obligations and Securities

ARTICLE 166. Forging Treasury or Bank Notes or Other Documents Payable to Bearer; Importing, and Uttering Such False or Forged Notes and Documents. — The forging or falsification of treasury or bank notes or certificates or other obligations and securities payable to bearer and the importation and uttering in connivance with forgers or importers of such false or forged obligations or notes, shall be punished as follows:

1. By reclusión temporal in its minimum period and a fine not to exceed 10,000 pesos, if the document which has been falsified, counterfeited, or altered is an obligation or security of the United States or of the Philippine Islands.

The word “obligation or security of the United States or of the Philippine Islands” shall be held to mean all bonds, certificates of indebtedness, national bank notes, coupons, United States or Philippine Islands notes, treasury notes, fractional notes, certificates of deposit, bills, checks, or drafts for money, drawn by or upon authorized officers of the United States or of the Philippine Islands, and other representatives of value, of whatever denomination, which have been or may be issued under any act of the Congress of the United States or of the Philippine Legislature.

2. By prisión mayor in its maximum period and a fine not to exceed 5,000 pesos, if the falsified or altered document is a circulating note issued by any banking association duly authorized by law to issue the same.

3. By prisión mayor in its medium period and a fine not to exceed 5,000 pesos, if the falsified or counterfeited document was issued by a foreign government.

4. By prisión mayor in its minimum period and a fine not to exceed 2,000 pesos, when the forged or altered document is a circulating note or bill issued by a foreign bank duly authorized therefor.

ARTICLE 167. Counterfeiting, Importing and Uttering Instruments Payable to Bearer. — Any person who shall forge, import or utter, in connivance with the forgers or importers, any instrument payable to order or other document of credit not payable to bearer, shall suffer the penalties of prision correccional in its medium and maximum periods and a fine not exceeding 6,000 pesos.

ARTICLE 168. Illegal Possession and Use of False Treasury or Bank Notes and Other Instruments of Credit. — Unless the act be one of those coming under the provisions of any of the preceding articles, any person who shall knowingly use or have in his possession, with intent to use any of the false or falsified instruments referred to in this section, shall suffer the penalty next lower in degree than that prescribed in said articles.

ARTICLE 169. How Forgery is Committed. — The forgery referred to in this section may be committed by any of the following means:

1. By giving to a treasury or bank note or any instrument payable to bearer or to order mentioned therein, the appearance of a true genuine document.

2. By erasing, substituting, counterfeiting or altering by any means the figures, letters, words or signs contained therein.