SECTION THREE

Prohibition, Interruption, and Dissolution of Peaceful Meetings

ARTICLE 131. Prohibition, Interruption, and Dissolution of Peaceful Meetings. — The penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum period shall be imposed upon any public officer or employee who, without legal ground, shall prohibit or interrupt the holding of a peaceful meeting, or shall dissolve the same.

The same penalty shall be imposed upon a public officer or employee who shall hinder any person from joining any lawful association or from attending any of its meetings.

The same penalty shall be imposed upon any public officer or employee who shall prohibit or hinder any person from addressing, either alone or together with others, any petition to the authorities for the correction of abuses or redress of grievances.

SECTION FOUR

Crimes Against Religious Worship

ARTICLE 132. Interruption of Religious Worship. — The penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum period shall be imposed upon any public officer or employee who shall prevent or disturb the ceremonies or manifestations of any religion.

If the crime shall have been committed with violence or threats, the penalty shall be prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods.

ARTICLE 133. Offending the Religious Feelings. — The penalty of arresto mayor in its maximum period to prisión correccional in its minimum period shall be imposed upon anyone who, in a place devoted to religious worship or during the celebration of any religious ceremony shall perform acts notoriously offensive to the feelings of the faithful.

TITLE THREE

Crimes Against Public Order

CHAPTER ONE

Rebellion, Sedition, and Disloyalty

ARTICLE 134. Rebellion or Insurrection. — How Committed. — The crime of rebellion or insurrection is committed by rising publicly and taking arms against the Government for the purpose of removing from the allegiance to said Government or its laws, the territory of the Philippine Islands or any part thereof of any body of land, naval or other armed forces, or of depriving the Chief Executive or the Legislature, wholly or partially, of any of their powers or prerogatives.

ARTICLE 135. Penalty for Rebellion or Insurrection. — Any person who promotes, maintains, or heads a rebellion or insurrection, or who, while holding any public office or employment takes part therein, engaging in war against the forces of the Government, destroying property or committing serious violence, exacting contributions or diverting public funds from the lawful purpose for which they have been appropriated, shall suffer the penalty of prisión mayor and a fine not to exceed 20,000 pesos.

Any person merely participating or executing the commands of others in a rebellion shall suffer the penalty of prisión mayor in its minimum period.

When the rebellion or insurrection shall be under the command of unknown leaders, any person who in fact directed the others, spoke for them, signed receipts and other documents issued in their name, as performed similar acts, on behalf of the rebels shall be deemed the leader of such rebellion.

ARTICLE 136. Conspiracy and Proposal to Commit Rebellion or Insurrection. — The conspiracy and proposal to commit rebellion or insurrection shall be punished, respectively, by prisión correccional in its maximum period and a fine which shall not exceed 5,000 pesos, and by prisión correccional in its medium period and a fine not exceeding 2,000 pesos.

ARTICLE 137. Disloyalty of Public Officers or Employees. — The penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum period shall be imposed upon public officers or employees who have failed to resist a rebellion by all the means in their power, or shall continue to discharge the duties of their offices under the control of the rebels or shall accept appointment to office under them.

ARTICLE 138. Inciting to Rebellion or Insurrection. — The penalty of prisión mayor in its minimum period shall be imposed upon any person who, without taking arms or being in open hostility against the Government, shall incite others to the execution of any of the acts specified in article 134 of this Code, by means of speeches, proclamations, writings, emblems, banners or other representations tending to the same end.

ARTICLE 139. Sedition — How Committed. — The crime of sedition is committed by persons who rise publicly and tumultuously in order to attain by force any of the following objects:

1. To prevent the promulgation or execution of any law or the holding of any popular election;

2. To prevent the Insular Government, or any provincial or municipal government or any public officer thereof from freely exercising its or his functions, or prevent the execution of any administrative order;

3. To inflict any act of hate or revenge upon the person or property of any public officer or employee;

4. To commit, for any political or social end, any act of hate or revenge against private persons or any social class; and

5. To despoil, for any political or social end, any person, municipality or province, or the Insular Government or the Government of the United States, of all its property or any part thereof.

ARTICLE 140. Penalty for Sedition. — The leader of a sedition shall suffer the penalty of prisión mayor in its minimum period and a fine not exceeding 10,000 pesos.

Other persons participating therein shall suffer the penalty of prisión correccional in its maximum period and a fine not exceeding 5,000 pesos.

ARTICLE 141. Conspiracy to Commit Sedition. — Persons conspiring to commit the crime of sedition shall be punished by prision correccional in its medium period and a fine not exceeding 2,000 pesos.

ARTICLE 142. Inciting to Sedition. — The penalty of prisión correccional in its maximum period and a fine not exceeding 2,000 pesos shall be imposed upon any person who, without taking any direct part in the crime of sedition, should incite others to the accomplishment of any of the acts which constitute sedition, by means of speeches, proclamations, writings, emblems, cartoons, banners, or other representations tending to the same end.

CHAPTER TWO

Crimes Against Popular Representation

SECTION ONE

Crimes Against Legislative Bodies and Similar Bodies

ARTICLE 143. Acts Tending to Prevent the Meeting of the Legislature and Similar Bodies. — The penalty of prisión correccional or a fine ranging from 200 to 2,000 pesos, or both, shall be imposed upon any person who by force or fraud prevents the meeting of either of the House of the Legislature or of any provincial board or municipal council.

ARTICLE 144. Disturbance of Proceedings. — The penalty of arresto mayor or a fine ranging from 200 to 1,000 pesos shall be imposed upon any person who disturbs the meetings of either of the House of the Legislature or of any provincial board or city or municipal council, or in the presence of any such bodies should behave in such manner as to interrupt its proceedings or to impair the respect due to it.

SECTION TWO

Violation of Parliamentary Immunity

ARTICLE 145. Violation of Parliamentary Immunity. — The penalty of prisión mayor shall be imposed upon any person who shall use force, intimidation, threats, or fraud to prevent any member of either House of the Legislature from attending the meetings thereof, from expressing his opinions or casting his vote; and the penalty of prisión correccional shall be imposed upon any public officer or employee who shall, while the Legislature is in session, knowingly arrest or search any member thereof, except in case such member has committed a crime punishable under this Code by a penalty higher than prisión mayor.
