CHAPTER THREE

Frauds

SECTION ONE

Machinations, Monopolies, and Combinations

ARTICLE 185. Machinations in Public Auctions. — Any person who shall solicit any gift or a promise as a consideration for refraining from taking part in any public auction, and any person who shall attempt to cause bidders to stay away from an auction by threats, gifts, promises, or any other artifice, with intent to cause the reduction of the price of the thing auctioned, shall suffer the penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum period and a fine ranging from 10 to 50 per centum of the value of the thing auctioned.

ARTICLE 186. Monopolies and Combinations in Restraint of Trade. — The penalty of prision correccional in its minimum period or a fine ranging from 200 to 6,000 pesos, or both, shall be imposed upon:

1. Any person who shall enter into any contract or agreement or shall take part in any conspiracy or combination in the form of a trust or otherwise, in restraint of trade or commerce or to prevent by artificial means free competition in the market;

2. Any person who shall monopolize any merchandise or object of trade or commerce, or shall combine with any other person or persons to monopolize said merchandise or object in order to alter the price thereof by spreading false rumors or making use of any other artifice to restrain free competition in the market;

3. Any person who, being an importer of any merchandise or object of commerce from any foreign country or from the United States, shall combine in any manner with other persons for the purpose of making transactions prejudicial to lawful commerce, or of increasing the market price in any part of the Philippine Islands of any article or articles imported or intended to be imported into said Islands, or of any article in the manufacture of which an imported article is used.

If the offense mentioned in this article affects any food substance or other article of prime necessity, the penalty shall be that of prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods, it being sufficient for the imposition thereof that the initial steps have been taken toward carrying out the purposes of the combination.

Any property possessed under any contract or by any combination mentioned in the preceding paragraphs, and being the subject thereof, shall be forfeited to the Government of the Philippine Islands.

Whenever any of the offenses described above is committed by a corporation or association, the president and each one of the directors or managers of said corporation or association, or its agents or representative in the Philippine Islands, in case of a foreign corporation or association, who shall have knowingly permitted or failed to prevent the commission of such offenses, shall be held liable as principals thereof.

SECTION TWO

Frauds in Commerce and Industry

ARTICLE 187. Importation and Disposition of Falsely Marked Articles or Merchandise Made of Gold, Silver, or Other Precious Metals or Their Alloys. — The penalty of prisión correccional or a fine ranging from 200 to 1,000 pesos, or both, shall be imposed upon any person who shall knowingly import or sell or dispose of any article or merchandise made of gold, silver, or other precious metals, or their alloys, with stamps, brands, or marks, which fail to indicate the actual fineness or quality of said metals or alloys.

Any stamp, brand, label, or mark shall be deemed to fail to indicate the actual fineness of the article on which it is engraved, printed, stamped, labeled or attached, when the test of the article shows that the quality or fineness thereof is less by more than one-half karat, if made of gold, and less by more than four one-thousandth, if made of silver, than what is shown by said stamp, brand, label, or mark. But in case of watch cases and flatware made of gold, the actual fineness of such gold shall not be less by more than three one-thousandth than the fineness indicated by said stamp, brand, label, or mark.

ARTICLE 188. Substituting and Altering Trade-marks and Trade-names. — The penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum period or a fine ranging from 200 to 1,000 pesos or both, shall be imposed upon:

1. Any person who shall substitute the name or mark of some other manufacturer for the name or mark of the real manufacturer upon any article of commerce and shall sell the same;

2. Any person who shall sell such articles of commerce or offer the same for sale, knowing that the trade-mark has been fraudulently used in such goods as described in the preceding subdivision; or

3. Any person who, knowing the purposes for which the trade-mark or trade-name of a person is to be used, prints, lithographs, or in any way reproduces such trade-mark or trade-name, or a colorable imitation thereof, for another person, to enable that other person to fraudulently use such trade-mark or trade-name on his own goods.

A trade-name or trade-mark is a word or words, name, emblem, sign, or device used as an advertisement, sign, label, poster or otherwise, for the purpose of enabling the public to distinguish the business of the person who owns and uses said trade-name or trade-mark.

ARTICLE 189. Unfair Competition and Fraudulent Registration of Trade-mark or Trade-name. — The penalty provided in the next preceding article shall be imposed upon any person who, in unfair competition and for the purpose of deceiving or defrauding another of his legitimate trade or the public in general, shall sell his goods giving them the general appearance of goods of another manufacturer or dealer, either in the wrapping of the packages in which they are contained, or the device or words thereon, or in any other feature of their appearance which would be likely to induce the public to believe that the goods offered are those of a manufacturer or dealer other than the actual manufacturer or dealer, or shall give other persons a chance or opportunity to do the same with a like purpose.

The penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum period or a fine ranging from 200 to 2,000 pesos, or both, shall be imposed upon any person who, by means of false or fraudulent representations or declarations, orally or in writing, or by other fraudulent means shall procure from the Office of Patents, Copyrights, and trade-marks the registry of a trade-mark, or of himself as the owner of a trade-mark or trade-name, or an entry respecting a trade-mark or trade-name.

TITLE FIVE

Crimes Relative to Opium and Other Prohibited Drugs

ARTICLE 190. Possession, Preparation and Use of Prohibited Drugs, and Maintenance of Opium Dens. — The penalty of arresto mayor in its medium period to prisión correccional in its minimum period and a fine ranging from 300 to 1,000 pesos shall be imposed upon:

1. Anyone who, unless lawfully authorized shall possess, prepare, administer, or otherwise use any prohibited drug.

“Prohibited drug,” as used herein, includes opium, cocaine, alpha and beta eucaine, their derivatives, and all preparations made from them or any of them.

“Opium” embraces every kind, class, and character of opium, whether crude or prepared; the ashes or refuse of the same; narcotic preparations thereof or therefrom; morphine or alkaloid of opium; preparation in which opium, morphine or alkaloid of opium, enter as an ingredient, and also opium leaves or wrappings of opium leaves, whether prepared or not, for their use.

2. Anyone who shall maintain a dive or resort where any prohibited drug is used in any form, in violation of the law.

ARTICLE 191. Keeper, Watchman and Visitor of Opium Den. — The penalty of arresto mayor and a fine ranging from 100 to 300 pesos shall be imposed upon:

1. Anyone who shall act as a keeper or watchman of a dive or resort where any prohibited drug is used in any manner contrary to law; and

2. Any person who, not being included in the provisions of the next preceding article, shall knowingly visit any dive or resort of the character referred to above.

ARTICLE 192. Importation and Sale of Prohibited Drugs. — The penalty of prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods and a fine ranging from 300 to 10,000 pesos shall be imposed upon any person who shall import or bring into the Philippine Islands any prohibited drug.

The same penalty shall be imposed upon any person who shall unlawfully sell or deliver to another any prohibited drug.

ARTICLE 193. Illegal Possession of Opium Pipe or Other Paraphernalia for the Use of Any Prohibited Drug. — The penalty of arresto mayor and a fine not exceeding 500 pesos shall be imposed upon any person who, not being authorized by law, shall possess any opium pipe or other paraphernalia for smoking, injecting, administering or using opium or any prohibited drug.

The illegal possession of an opium pipe or other paraphernalia for using any other prohibited drug shall be prima facie evidence that its possessor has used said drug.

ARTICLE 194. Prescribing Opium Unnecessarily for a Patient. — The penalty of prisión correccional or a fine ranging from 300 to 10,000 pesos, or both, shall be imposed upon any physician or dentist who shall prescribe opium for any person whose physical condition does not require the use of the same.

TITLE SIX

Crimes Against Public Morals

CHAPTER ONE

Gambling and Betting

ARTICLE 195. What Acts are Punishable in Gambling. — The penalty of arresto menor or a fine not exceeding 200 pesos, and, in case of recidivism, the penalty of arresto mayor or a fine ranging from 200 to 6,000 pesos, shall be imposed upon:

1. Any person who, in any manner, shall directly or indirectly take part in any game of monte, jueteng or any other form of lottery, policy, banking or percentage game, dog races or any other game or scheme the result of which depends wholly or chiefly upon chance or hazard; or wherein wagers consisting of money, articles of value or representative of value are made; or in the exploitation or use of any other mechanical invention or contrivance to determine by chance the loser or winner of money or any object or representative of value.

2. Any person who shall knowingly permit any form of gambling referred to in the preceding subdivision to be carried on in any inhabited or uninhabited place or any building, vessel or other means of transportation owned or controlled by him. If the place where gambling is carried on has the reputation of a gambling place or that prohibited gambling is frequently carried on therein, the culprit shall be punished by the penalty provided for in this article in its maximum period.

3. Any person who shall, knowingly and without lawful purpose, have in his possession any lottery list, paper or other matter containing letters, figures, signs or symbols which pertain to or are in any manner used in the game of jueteng or any similar game which has taken place or is about to take place.

ARTICLE 196. Importation, Sale and Possession of Lottery Tickets or Advertisements. — The penalty of arresto mayor in its maximum period to prisión correccional in its minimum period or a fine ranging from 200 to 2,000 pesos, or both, in the discretion of the court, shall be imposed upon any person who shall import into the Philippine Islands from any foreign place or port any lottery ticket or advertisement or, in connivance with the importer, shall sell or distribute the same.

Any person who shall knowingly and with intent to use them, have in his possession lottery tickets or advertisements, or shall sell or distribute the same without connivance with the importer of the same, shall be punished by arresto menor, or a fine not exceeding 200 pesos, or both, in the discretion of the court.

The possession of any lottery ticket or advertisement shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to sell, distribute or use the same in the Philippine Islands.

ARTICLE 197. Betting in Sports Contests. — The penalty of arresto menor or a fine not exceeding 200 pesos, or both, shall be imposed upon any person who shall bet money or any object or article of value or representative of value upon the result of any boxing or other sports contests.

ARTICLE 198. Illegal Betting on Horse Races. — The penalty of arresto menor or a fine not exceeding 200 pesos, or both, shall be imposed upon any person who, except during the periods allowed by law, shall bet on horse races. The penalty of arresto mayor or a fine ranging from 200 to 2,000 pesos, or both, shall be imposed upon any person who, under the same circumstances, shall maintain or employ a totalizer or other device or scheme for betting on horse races or realizing any profit therefrom.

For the purpose of this article, any race held on the same day and at the same place shall be held punishable as a separate offense, and if the same be committed by any partnership, corporation or association, the president and the directors or managers thereof shall be deemed to be principals in the offense if they have consented to or knowingly tolerated its commission.

ARTICLE 199. Illegal Cockfighting. — The penalty of arresto menor or a fine not exceeding 200 pesos, or both, in the discretion of the court, shall be imposed upon:

1. Any person who directly or indirectly participates in cockfights, by betting money or other valuable things, or who organizes cockfights at which bets are made, on a day other than those permitted by law.

2. Any person who directly or indirectly participates in cockfights, by betting money or other valuable things, or organizes such cockfights, at a place other than a licensed cockpit.
