ARTICLE 249. Homicide. — Any person who, not falling within the provisions of article 246 shall kill another without the attendance of any of the circumstances enumerated in the next preceding article, shall be deemed guilty of homicide and be punished by reclusion temporal.

ARTICLE 250. Penalty for Frustrated Parricide, Murder or Homicide. — The courts, in view of the facts of the case, may impose upon the person guilty of the frustrated crime of parricide, murder or homicide, defined and penalized in the preceding articles, a penalty lower by one degree than that which should be imposed under the provision of article 50.

The courts, considering the facts of the case, may likewise reduce by one degree the penalty which under article 51 should be imposed for an attempt to commit any of such crimes.

ARTICLE 251. Death Caused in a Tumultuous Affray. — When, while several persons, not composing groups organized for the common purpose of assaulting and attacking each other reciprocally, quarrel and assault each other in a confused and tumultuous manner, and in the course of the affray someone is killed, and it cannot be ascertained who actually killed the deceased, but the person or persons who inflicted serious physical injuries can be identified, such person or persons shall be punished by prisión mayor.

If it cannot be determined who inflicted the serious physical injuries on the deceased, the penalty of prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods shall be imposed upon all those who shall have used violence upon the person of the victim.

ARTICLE 252. Physical Injuries Inflicted in a Tumultuous Affray. — When in a tumultuous affray as referred to in the preceding article, only serious physical injuries are inflicted upon the participants thereof and the person responsible therefor cannot be identified, all those who appear to have used violence upon the person of the offended party shall suffer the penalty next lower in degree than that provided for the physical injuries so inflicted.

When the physical injuries inflicted are of a less serious nature and the person responsible therefor cannot be identified, all those who appear to have used any violence upon the person of the offended party shall be punished by arresto from five to fifteen days.

ARTICLE 253. Giving Assistance to Suicide. — Any person who shall assist another to commit suicide shall suffer the penalty of prisión mayor; if such person lends his assistance to another to the extent of doing the killing himself, he shall suffer the penalty of reclusión temporal. However, if the suicide is not consummated, the penalty of arresto mayor in its medium and maximum periods shall be imposed.

ARTICLE 254. Discharge of Firearms. — Any person who shall shoot at another with any firearm shall suffer the penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum and medium periods, unless the facts of the case are such that the act can be held to constitute frustrated or attempted parricide, murder, homicide or any other crime for which a higher penalty is prescribed by any of the articles of this Code.

SECTION TWO

Infanticide and Abortion

ARTICLE 255. Infanticide. — The penalty provided for parricide in article 246 and for murder in article 248 shall be imposed upon any person who shall kill any child less than three days of age.

If the crime penalized in this article be committed by the mother of the child for the purpose of concealing her dishonor, she shall suffer the penalty of prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods, and if said crime be committed for the same purpose by the maternal grandparents or either of them, the penalty shall be prisión mayor.

ARTICLE 256. Intentional Abortion. — Any person who shall intentionally cause an abortion shall suffer:

1. The penalty of reclusión temporal, if he shall use any violence upon the person of the pregnant woman.

2. The penalty of prisión mayor if, without using violence, he shall act without the consent of the woman.

3. The penalty of prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods, if the woman shall have consented.

ARTICLE 257. Unintentional Abortion. — The penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum and medium period shall be imposed upon any person who shall cause an abortion by violence, but unintentionally.

ARTICLE 258. Abortion Practiced by the Woman Herself or by Her Parents. — The penalty of prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods shall be imposed upon a woman who shall practice an abortion upon herself or shall consent that any other person should do so.

Any woman who shall commit this offense to conceal her dishonor, shall suffer the penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum and medium periods.

If this crime be committed by the parents of the pregnant woman or either of them, and they act with the consent of said woman for the purpose of concealing her dishonor, the offenders shall suffer the penalty of prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods.

ARTICLE 259. Abortion Practiced by a Physician or Midwife and Dispensing of Abortives. — The penalties provided in article 256 shall be imposed in its maximum period, respectively, upon any physician or midwife who, taking advantage of their scientific knowledge or skill, shall cause an abortion or assist in causing the same.

Any pharmacist who, without the proper prescription from a physician, shall dispense any abortive shall suffer arresto mayor and a fine not exceeding 1,000 pesos.

SECTION THREE

Duel

ARTICLE 260. Responsibility of Participants in a Duel. — The penalty of reclusión temporal shall be imposed upon any person who shall kill his adversary in a duel.

If he shall inflict upon the latter physical injuries only, he shall suffer the penalty provided therefor, according to their nature.

In any other case, the combatants shall suffer the penalty of arresto mayor, although no physical injuries have been inflicted.

The seconds shall in all events be punished as accomplices.

ARTICLE 261. Challenging to a Duel. — The penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum period shall be imposed upon any person who shall challenge another, or incite another to give or accept a challenge to a duel, or shall scoff at or decry another publicly for having refused to accept a challenge to fight a duel.

CHAPTER TWO

Physical Injuries

ARTICLE 262. Mutilation. — The penalty of reclusión temporal to reclusión perpetua shall be imposed upon any person who shall intentionally mutilate another by depriving him, either totally or partially, of some essential organ for reproduction.

Any other intentional mutilation shall be punished by prisión mayor in its medium and maximum periods.

ARTICLE 263. Serious Physical Injuries. — Any person who shall wound, beat, or assault another, shall be guilty of the crime of serious physical injuries and shall suffer:

1. The penalty of prisión mayor, if in consequence of the physical injuries inflicted, the injured person shall become insane, imbecile, impotent, or blind;

2. The penalty of prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods, if in consequence of the physical injuries inflicted, the person injured shall have lost the use of speech or the power to hear or to smell, or shall have lost an eye, a hand, a foot, an arm, or a leg or shall have lost the use of any such member, or shall have become incapacitated for the work in which he was theretofore habitually engaged;

3. The penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum and medium periods, if in consequence of the physical injuries inflicted, the person injured shall have become deformed, or shall have lost any other part of his body, or shall have lost the use thereof, or shall have been ill or incapacitated for the performance of the work in which he was habitually engaged for a period of more than ninety days;

4. The penalty of arresto mayor in its maximum period to prisión correccional in its minimum period, if the physical injuries inflicted shall have caused the illness or incapacity for labor of the injured person for more than thirty days.

If the offense shall have been committed against any of the persons enumerated in article 246, or with attendance of any of the circumstances mentioned in article 248, the case covered by subdivision number 1 of this article shall be punished by reclusión temporal in its medium and maximum periods; the case covered by subdivision number 2 by prisión correccional in its maximum period to prisión mayor in its minimum period; the case covered by subdivision number 3 by prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods; and the case covered by subdivision number 4 by prisión correccional in its minimum and medium periods.

The provisions of the preceding paragraph shall not be applicable to a parent who shall inflict physical injuries upon his child by excessive chastisement.

ARTICLE 264. Administering Injurious Substances or Beverages. — The penalties established by the next preceding article shall be applicable in the respective cases to any person who, without intent to kill, shall inflict upon another any serious physical injury, by knowingly administering to him any injurious substances or beverages or by taking advantage of his weakness of mind or credulity.

ARTICLE 265. Less Serious Physical Injuries. — Any person who shall inflict upon another physical injuries not described in the preceding articles, but which shall incapacitate the offended party for labor for ten days or more, or shall require medical attendance for the same period, shall be guilty of less serious physical injuries and shall suffer the penalty of arresto mayor.

Whenever less serious physical injuries shall have been inflicted with the manifest intent to insult or offend the injured person, or under circumstances adding ignominy to the offense, in addition to the penalty of arresto mayor, a fine not exceeding 500 pesos shall be imposed.

Any less serious physical injuries inflicted upon the offender’s parents, ascendants, guardians, curators, teachers, or persons of rank, or persons in authority, shall be punished by prisión correccional in its minimum and medium periods, provided that, in the case of persons in authority, the deed does not constitute the crime of assault upon such persons.

ARTICLE 266. Slight Physical Injuries and Maltreatment. — The crime of slight physical injuries shall be punished:

1. By arresto menor when the offender has inflicted physical injuries which shall incapacitate the offended party for labor from one to nine days, or shall require medical attendance during the same period.

2. By arresto menor or a fine not exceeding 200 pesos and censure when the offender has caused physical injuries which do not prevent the offended party from engaging in his habitual work nor require medical attendance.

3. By arresto menor in its minimum period or a fine not exceeding 50 pesos when the offender shall ill-treat another by deed without causing any injury.
