CHAPTER SEVEN

Chattel Mortgage

ARTICLE 319. Removal, Sale or Pledge of Mortgaged Property. — The penalty or arresto mayor or a fine amounting to twice the value of the property shall be imposed upon:

1. Any person who shall knowingly remove any personal property mortgaged under the Chattel Mortgage Law to any province or city other than the one in which it was located at the time of the execution of the mortgage, without the written consent of the mortgagee, or his executors, administrators or assigns.

2. Any mortgagor who shall sell or pledge personal property already pledged, or any part thereof, under the terms of the Chattel Mortgage Law, without the consent of the mortgagee written on the back of the mortgage and noted on the record thereof in the office of the register of deeds of the province where such property is located.

CHAPTER EIGHT

Arson and Other Crimes Involving Destruction

ARTICLE 320. Destructive Arson. — The penalty of reclusión temporal in its maximum period to reclusión perpetua shall be imposed upon any person who shall burn:

1. Any arsenal, shipyard, storehouse or military powder or fireworks factory, ordnance storehouse, archives or general museum of the government.

2. Any passenger train or motor vehicle in motion or vessel out of port.

3. In an inhabited place, any storehouse or factory of inflammable or explosive materials.

4. Any theater, church, cockpit, or other building where meetings are held, when occupied by a numerous assemblage.

ARTICLE 321. Other Forms of Arson. — When the arson consists in the burning of other property and under the circumstances given hereunder, the offender shall be punished:

1. By reclusión temporal or reclusión perpetua, if the offender shall set fire to any building, farmhouse, warehouse, hut, shelter, or vessel in port, knowing it to be occupied at the time by one or more persons.

2. By reclusión temporal:

(a) If the building burned is a public building and the value of the damage caused exceeds 6,000 pesos;

(b) If an inhabited house or any other building in which people are accustomed to meet is set on fire, and the culprit did not know that such house or building was occupied at the time, or if he shall set fire to a moving freight train or motor vehicle, and the value of the damage caused exceeds 6,000 pesos.

3. By prisión mayor:

(a) If the value of the damage caused in the cases mentioned in the next preceding subdivision does not exceed 6,000 pesos.

(b) If a building not used as a dwelling or place of assembly, located in a populated place, is set on fire, and the damage caused exceeds 6,000 pesos.

(c) If a farm, sugar mill, cane mill, central, mill, bamboo groves or any similar plantation is set on fire, and the damage caused exceeds 6,000 pesos.

4. By prisión correccional in its maximum period to prisión mayor in its medium period, when the damage caused exceeds 6,000 pesos and the following are set on fire:

(a) A building used as a dwelling located in an uninhabited place; or

(b) Grain fields, pasture lands, forests, or plantings.

5. By prisión correccional in its medium period to prisión mayor in its minimum period, when the damage caused is over 200 pesos but does not exceed 1,000 pesos, and any of the property referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b) of the next preceding subdivision is set on fire; but when the value of such property does not exceed 200 pesos, the penalty next lower in degree than that prescribed in this subdivision shall be imposed when the property burned is a building used as a dwelling in an uninhabited place, and the penalty of arresto menor and a fine ranging from fifty to one hundred per centum of the damage caused shall be imposed, when the property burned consist of grain fields, pasture lands, forests or plantations.

6. The penalty of prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods, if the damage caused in the cases mentioned in paragraphs (b) and (c) of subdivision 3 of this article does not exceed 6,000 pesos but is over 200.

7. The penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum and medium periods, if the damage caused in the cases mentioned in paragraphs (b) and (c) of subdivision 3 of this article does not exceed 200 pesos.

ARTICLE 322. Cases of Arson Not Included in the Preceding Articles. — Cases of arson not included in the next preceding articles shall be punished:

1. By arresto mayor in its medium and maximum periods, when the damage caused does not exceed 50 pesos;

2. By arresto mayor in its maximum period to prisión correccional in its minimum period, when the damage caused is over 50 pesos but does not exceed 200 pesos;

3. By prisión correccional in its minimum and medium periods, if the damage caused is over 200 pesos but does not exceed 1,000 pesos; and

4. By prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods, if it is over 1,000 pesos.

ARTICLE 323. Arson of Property of Small Value. — The arson of any uninhabited hut, storehouse, barn, shed, or any other property the value of which does not exceed 25 pesos, committed at a time or under circumstances which clearly exclude all danger of the fire spreading, shall not be punished by the penalties respectively prescribed in this chapter, but in accordance with the damage caused and under the provisions of the following chapter.

ARTICLE 324. Crimes Involving Destruction. — Any person who shall cause destruction by means of explosion, discharge of electric current, inundation, sinking or stranding of a vessel, intentional damaging of the engine of said vessel, taking up the rails from a railway track, maliciously changing railway signals for the safety of moving trains, destroying telegraph wires and telegraph posts, or those of any other system, and, in general, by using any other agency or means of destruction as effective as those above enumerated, shall be punished by reclusión temporal if the commission has endangered the safety of any person; otherwise, the penalty of prisión mayor shall be imposed.

ARTICLE 325. Burning One’s Own Property as a Means to Commit Arson. — Any person guilty of arson or causing great destruction of property belonging to another shall suffer the penalties prescribed in this chapter, even though he shall have set fire to or destroyed his own property for the purpose of committing the crime.

ARTICLE 326. Setting Fire to Property Exclusively Owned by the Offender. — If the property burned shall be the exclusive property of the offender, he shall be punished by arresto mayor in its maximum period to prisión correccional in its minimum period, if the arson shall have been committed for the purpose of defrauding or causing damage to another, or if, though such purpose be lacking, said damage or prejudice shall actually have been caused, or if the thing burned shall have been a building in an inhabited place.

CHAPTER NINE

Malicious Mischief

ARTICLE 327. Who are Liable for Malicious Mischief . — Any person who shall deliberately cause to the property of another any damage not falling within the terms of the next preceding chapter shall be guilty of malicious mischief.

ARTICLE 328. Special Cases of Malicious Mischief . — Any person who shall cause damage to obstruct the performance of public functions, or using any poisonous or corrosive substance; or spreading any infection or contagion among cattle; or who causes damage to the property of the National Museum or National Library, or to any archive or registry, waterworks, road, promenade, or any other thing used in common by the public, shall be punished:

1. By prisión correccional in its minimum and medium periods, if the value of the damage caused exceeds 1,000 pesos;

2. By arresto mayor, if such value does not exceed the abovementioned amount but is over 200 pesos; and

3. By arresto menor, if such value does not exceed 200 pesos.

ARTICLE 329. Other Mischiefs. — The mischiefs not included in the next preceding article shall be punished:

1. By arresto mayor in its medium and maximum periods, if the value of the damage caused exceeds 1,000 pesos;

2. By arresto mayor in its minimum and medium periods, if such value is over 200 pesos but does not exceed 1,000 pesos; and

3. By arresto menor or fine of not less than the value of the damage caused and not more than three times such value, if the amount involved exceeds 200 pesos or cannot be estimated.

ARTICLE 330. Damages and Obstruction to Means of Communication. — The penalty of prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods shall be imposed upon any person who shall damage any railway, telegraph or telephone lines.

If the damage shall result in any derailment of cars, collision or other accident, the penalty of prisión mayor shall be imposed, without prejudice to the criminal liability of the offender for the other consequences of his criminal act.

For the purpose of the provisions of this article, the electric wires, traction cables, signal system and other things pertaining to railways, shall be deemed to constitute an integral part of a railway system.

ARTICLE 331. Destroying or Damaging Statues, Public Monuments or Paintings. — Any person who shall destroy or damage statues or any other useful or ornamental public monument, shall suffer the penalty of arresto mayor in its medium period to prisión correccional in its minimum period.

Any person who shall destroy or damage any useful or ornamental painting of a public nature shall suffer the penalty of arresto menor or a fine not exceeding 200 pesos, or both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.

CHAPTER TEN

Exemption from Criminal Liability in Crimes Against Property

ARTICLE 332. Persons Exempt from Criminal Liability. — No criminal, but only civil liability, shall result from the commission of the crime of theft, swindling or malicious mischief committed or caused mutually by the following persons:

1. Spouses, ascendants and descendants, or relatives by affinity in the same line;

2. The widowed spouse with respect to the property which belonged to the deceased spouse before the same shall have passed into the possession of another; and

3. Brothers and sisters and brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law, if living together.

The exemption established by this article shall not be applicable to strangers participating in the commission of the crime.

TITLE ELEVEN

Crimes Against Chastity

CHAPTER ONE

Adultery and Concubinage

ARTICLE 333. Who are Guilty of Adultery. — Adultery is committed by any married woman who shall have sexual intercourse with a man not her husband and by the man who has carnal knowledge of her, knowing her to be married, even if the marriage be subsequently declared void.

Adultery shall be punished by prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods.

If the person guilty of adultery committed this offense while being abandoned without justification by the offended spouse, the penalty next lower in degree than that provided in the next preceding paragraph shall be imposed.

ARTICLE 334. Concubinage. — Any husband who shall keep a mistress in the conjugal dwelling, or, shall have sexual intercourse, under scandalous circumstances, with a woman who is not his wife, or shall cohabit with her in any other place, shall be punished by prisión correccional in its minimum and medium periods.

The concubine shall suffer the penalty of destierro.

CHAPTER TWO

Rape and Acts of Lasciviousness

ARTICLE 335. When and How Rape is Committed. — Rape is committed by having carnal knowledge of a woman under any of the following circumstances:

1. By using force or intimidation;

2. When the woman is deprived of reason or otherwise unconscious; and

3. When the woman is under twelve years of age, even though neither of the circumstances mentioned in the two next preceding paragraphs shall be present.

The crime of rape shall be punished by reclusión temporal.

ARTICLE 336. Acts of Lasciviousness. — Any person who shall commit any act of lasciviousness upon other persons of either sex, under any of the circumstances mentioned in the preceding article, shall be punished by prisión correccional.

CHAPTER THREE

Seduction, Corruption of Minors and White Slave Trade

ARTICLE 337. Qualified Seduction. — The seduction of a virgin over twelve years and under eighteen years of age, committed by any person in public authority, priest, house-servant, domestic, guardian, teacher, or any person who, in any capacity, shall be entrusted with the education or custody of the woman seduced, shall be punished by prisión correccional in its minimum and medium periods.

The penalty next higher in degree shall be imposed upon any person who shall seduce his sister or descendant, whether or not she be a virgin or over eighteen years of age.

Under the provisions of this Chapter, seduction is committed when the offender has carnal knowledge of any of the persons and under the circumstances described herein.

ARTICLE 338. Simple Seduction. — The seduction of a woman who is single or a widow of good reputation, over twelve but under eighteen years of age, committed by means of deceit, shall be punished by arresto mayor.

ARTICLE 339. Acts of Lasciviousness with the Consent of the Offended Party. — The penalty of arresto mayor shall be imposed to punish any other acts of lasciviousness committed by the same persons and the same circumstances as those provided in articles 337 and 338.

ARTICLE 340. Corruption of Minors. — Any person who shall habitually or with abuse of authority or confidence, promote or facilitate the prostitution or corruption of persons underage to satisfy the lust of another, shall be punished by prisión correccional in its minimum and medium periods, and if the culprit be a public officer, he shall also suffer the penalty of temporary absolute disqualification.

ARTICLE 341. White Slave Trade. — The penalty of prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods shall be imposed upon any person who, in any manner, or under any pretext, shall engage in the business or shall profit by prostitution or shall enlist the services of women for the purpose of prostitution.

CHAPTER FOUR

Abduction

ARTICLE 342. Forcible Abduction. — The abduction of any woman against her will and with lewd designs shall be punished by reclusión temporal.

The same penalty shall be imposed in every case, if the female abducted be under twelve years of age.

ARTICLE 343. Consented Abduction. — The abduction of a virgin over twelve years and under eighteen years of age, carried out with her consent and with lewd designs, shall be punished by the penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum and medium periods.

CHAPTER FIVE

Provisions Relative to the Preceding Chapters of Title Eleven

ARTICLE 344. Prosecution of the Crimes of Adultery, Concubinage, Seduction, Abduction, Rape and Acts of Lasciviousness. — The crimes of adultery and concubinage shall not be prosecuted except upon a complaint filed by the offended spouse.

The offended party cannot institute criminal prosecution without including both the guilty parties, if they are both alive, nor, in any case, if he shall have consented or pardoned the offenders.

The offenses of seduction, abduction, rape or acts of lasciviousness, shall not be prosecuted except upon a complaint filed by the offended party or her parents, grandparents, or guardian, nor, in any case, if the offender has been expressly pardoned by the above named persons, as the case may be.

In cases of seduction, abduction, acts of lasciviousness and rape, the marriage of the offender with the offended party shall extinguish the criminal action or remit the penalty already imposed upon him. The provisions of this paragraph shall also be applicable to the co-principals, accomplices and accessories after the fact of the abovementioned crimes.