
ARTICLE 51. Penalty to Be Imposed Upon Principals of Attempted Crimes. — The penalty lower by two degrees than that prescribed by law for the consummated felony shall be imposed upon the principals in an attempt to commit a felony.

ARTICLE 52. Penalty to Be Imposed Upon Accomplices in a Consummated Crime. — The penalty next lower in degree than that prescribed by law for the consummated felony shall be imposed upon the accomplices in the commission of a consummated felony.

ARTICLE 53. Penalty to Be Imposed Upon Accessories to the Commission of a Consummated Felony. — The penalty lower by two degrees than that prescribed by law for the consummated felony shall be imposed upon the accessories to the commission of a consummated felony.

ARTICLE 54. Penalty to Be Imposed Upon Accomplices in a Frustrated Crime. — The penalty next lower in degree than that prescribed by law for the frustrated felony shall be imposed upon the accomplices in the commission of a frustrated felony.

ARTICLE 55. Penalty to Be Imposed Upon Accessories of a Frustrated Crime. — The penalty lower by two degrees than that prescribed by law for the frustrated felony shall be imposed upon the accessories to the commission of a frustrated felony.

ARTICLE 56. Penalty to Be Imposed Upon Accomplices in an Attempted Crime. — The penalty next lower in degree than that prescribed by law for an attempt to commit a felony shall be imposed upon the accomplices in an attempt to commit the felony.

ARTICLE 57. Penalty to Be Imposed Upon Accessories of an Attempted Crime. — The penalty lower by two degrees than that prescribed by law for the attempt shall be imposed upon the accessories to the attempt to commit a felony.

ARTICLE 58. Additional Penalty to Be Imposed Upon Certain Accessories. — Those accessories falling within the terms of paragraph 3 of article 19 of this Code who should act with abuse of their public functions, shall suffer the additional penalty or absolute perpetual disqualification if the principal offender shall be guilty of a grave felony, and that of absolute temporary disqualification if he shall be guilty of a less grave felony.

ARTICLE 59. Penalty to Be Imposed in Case of Failure to Commit the Crime Because the Means Employed or the Aims Sought are Impossible. — When the person intending to commit an offense has already performed the acts for the execution of the same but nevertheless the crime was not produced by reason of the fact that the act intended was by its nature one of impossible accomplishment or because the means employed by such person are essentially inadequate to produce the result desired by him, the court, having in mind the social danger and the degree of criminality shown by the offender, shall impose upon him the penalty of arresto mayor or a fine ranging from 200 to 500 pesos.

ARTICLE 60. Exceptions to the Rules Established in Articles 50 to 57. — The provisions contained in articles 50 to 57, inclusive, of this Code shall not be applicable to cases in which the law expressly prescribes the penalty provided for a frustrated or attempted felony, or to be imposed upon accomplices or accessories.

ARTICLE 61. Rules for Graduating Penalties. — For the purpose of graduating the penalties which, according to the provisions of articles 50 to 57, inclusive, of this Code, are to be imposed upon persons guilty as principals of any frustrated or attempted felony, or as accomplices or accessories, the following rules shall be observed:

1. When the penalty prescribed for the felony is single and indivisible, the penalty next lower in degree shall be that immediately following that indivisible penalty in the scale prescribed in article 70 of this Code.

2. When the penalty prescribed for the crime is composed of two indivisible penalties, or of one or more divisible penalties to be imposed to their full extent, the penalty next lower in degree shall be that immediately following the lesser of the penalties prescribed in the above mentioned scale.

3. When the penalty prescribed for the crime is composed of one or two indivisible penalties and the maximum period of another divisible penalty, the penalty next lower in degree shall be composed of the medium and minimum periods of the proper divisible penalty and the maximum period of that immediately following in said scale.

4. When the penalty prescribed for the crime is composed of several periods, corresponding to different divisible penalties, the penalty next lower in degree shall be composed of the period immediately following the minimum prescribed and of the two next following, which shall be taken from the penalty prescribed, if possible; otherwise, from the penalty immediately following in the above mentioned scale.

5. When the law prescribes a penalty for a crime in some manner not specially provided for in the four preceding rules, the courts, proceeding by analogy, shall impose corresponding penalties upon those guilty as principals of the frustrated felony, or of attempt to commit the same, and upon accomplices and accessories.

TABULATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF THE CHAPTER

Penalty Prescribe for the crime

Penalty to be imposed upon the principal in a frustrated crime, and accomplice in a consummated crime

Penalty to be imposed upon the principal in an attempted crime, the accessory in the consummated crime and the accomplices in a frustrated crime.

Penalty to be imposed upon the accessory in a frustrated crime, and the accomplices in an attempted crime

Penalty to be imposed upon the accessory in an attempted crime

First Case	Death	Reclusion Perpetua	Reclusion Temporal	Prision Mayor	Prision Correccional
Second Case	Reclusion Perpetua to Death	Reclusion Temporal	Prision Mayor	Prision Correccional	Arresto Mayor
Third Case	Reclusion Temporal in its maximum period to death	Prision Mayor in its maximum period to reclusion temporal in its medium period	Prision correccional in its maximum period to prision mayor in its medium period	Arresto Mayor in it s maximum period to prision correccional in its medium period	Fine and Arresto Mayor in its minimum and medium periods
Fourth Case	Prision Mayor in its maximum period to reclusion temporal in its medium period.	Prision correccional in its maximum period to prision mayor in its medium period.	Arresto mayor in its maximum period to prision correccionalin its medium period.	Fine and Arresto Mayor in its minimum and medium periods	

SECTION TWO

Rules for the Application of Penalties with Regard to the Mitigating and Aggravating Circumstances, and Habitual Delinquency

ARTICLE 62. Effects of the Attendance of Mitigating or Aggravating Circumstances and of Habitual Delinquency. — Mitigating or aggravating circumstances and habitual delinquency shall be taken into account for the purpose of diminishing or increasing the penalty in conformity with the following rules:

1. Aggravating circumstances which in themselves constitute a crime specially punishable by law or which are included by the law in defining a crime and prescribing the penalty therefor shall not be taken into account for the purpose of increasing the penalty.

2. The same rule shall apply with respect to any aggravating circumstances inherent in the crime to such a degree that it must of necessity accompany the commission thereof.

3. Aggravating or mitigating circumstances which arise from the moral attributes of the offender, or from his private relations with the offended party, or from any other personal cause, shall only serve to aggravate or mitigate the liability of the principals, accomplices and accessories as to whom such circumstances are attendant.

4. The circumstances which consist in the material execution of the act, or in the means employed to accomplish it, shall serve to aggravate or mitigate the liability of those persons only who had knowledge of them at the time of the execution of the act or their cooperation therein.

5. Habitual delinquency shall have the following effects:

(a) Upon a third conviction the culprit shall be sentenced to the penalty provided by law for the last crime of which he be found guilty and to the additional penalty of prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods;

(b) Upon a fourth conviction the culprit shall be sentenced to the penalty provided for the last crime of which he be found guilty and to the additional penalty of prisión mayor in its minimum and medium periods; and

(c) Upon a fifth or additional conviction, the culprit shall be sentenced to the penalty provided for the last crime of which he be found guilty and to the additional penalty of prisión mayor in its maximum period to reclusión temporal in its minimum period.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the total of the two penalties to be imposed upon the offender, in conformity herewith, shall in no case exceed 30 years.

For the purpose of this article, a person shall be deemed to be habitual delinquent, if within a period of ten years from the date of his release or last conviction of the crimes robo, hurto, estafa, or falsificacion, he is found guilty of any of said crimes a third time or oftener.

ARTICLE 63. Rules for the Application of Indivisible Penalties. — In all cases in which the law prescribes a single indivisible penalty, it shall be applied by the courts regardless of any mitigating or aggravating circumstances that may have attended the commission of the deed.

In all cases in which the law prescribes a penalty composed of two indivisible penalties, the following rules shall be observed in the application thereof:

1. When in the commission of the deed there is present only one aggravating circumstance, the greater penalty shall be applied.

2. When there are neither mitigating nor aggravating circumstances in the commission of the deed, the lesser penalty shall be applied.

3. When the commission of the act is attended by some mitigating circumstance and there is no aggravating circumstance, the lesser penalty shall be applied.

4. When both mitigating and aggravating circumstances attended the commission of the act, the courts shall reasonably allow them to offset one another in consideration of their number and importance, for the purpose of applying the penalty in accordance with the preceding rules, according to the result of such compensation.

ARTICLE 64. Rules for the Application of Penalties Which Contain Three Periods. — In cases in which the penalties prescribed by law contain three periods, whether it be a single divisible penalty or composed of three different penalties, each one of which forms a period in accordance with the provisions of articles 76 and 77, the courts shall observe for the application of the penalty the following rules, according to whether there are or are not mitigating or aggravating circumstances:

1. When there are neither aggravating nor mitigating circumstances, they shall impose the penalty prescribed by law in its medium period.

2. When only a mitigating circumstance is present in the commission of the act, they shall impose the penalty in its minimum period.

3. When only an aggravating circumstance is present in the commission of the act, they shall impose the penalty in its maximum period.

4. When both mitigating and aggravating circumstances are present, the court shall reasonably offset those of one class against the other according to their relative weight.

5. When there are two or more mitigating circumstances and no aggravating circumstances are present, the court shall impose the penalty next lower to that prescribed by law, in the period that it may deem applicable, according to the number and nature of such circumstances.

6. Whatever may be the number and nature of the aggravating circumstances, the courts shall not impose a greater penalty than that prescribed by law, in its maximum period.

7. Within the limits of each period, the courts shall determine the extent of the penalty according to the number and nature of the aggravating and mitigating circumstances and the greater or lesser extent of the evil produced by the crime.

ARTICLE 65. Rule in Cases in Which the Penalty is Not Composed of Three Periods. — In cases in which the penalty prescribed by law is not composed of three periods, the courts shall apply the rules contained in the foregoing articles, dividing into three equal portions the time included in the penalty prescribed, and forming one period of each of the three portions.

ARTICLE 66. Imposition of Fines. — In imposing fines the courts may fix any amount within the limits established by law; in fixing the amount in each case attention shall be given, not only to the mitigating and aggravating circumstances, but more particularly to the wealth or means of the culprit.

ARTICLE 67. Penalty to Be Imposed When Not All the Requisites of Exemption of the Fourth Circumstance of Article 12 are Present.— When all the conditions required in circumstance number 4 of article 12 of this Code to exempt from criminal liability are not present, the penalty of arresto mayor in its maximum period to prisión correccional in its minimum period shall be imposed upon the culprit if he shall have been guilty of a grave felony, and arresto mayor in its minimum and medium periods, if of a less grave felony.

ARTICLE 68. Penalty to Be Imposed Upon a Person Under Eighteen Years of Age. — When the offender is a minor under eighteen years and his case is one coming under the provisions of the paragraph next to the last of article 80 of this Code, the following rules shall be observed:

1. Upon a person under fifteen but over nine years of age, who is not exempted from liability by reason of the court having declared that he acted with discernment, a discretionary penalty shall be imposed, but always lower by two degrees at least than that prescribed by law for the crime which he committed.

2. Upon a person over fifteen and under eighteen years of age the penalty next lower than that prescribed by law shall be imposed, but always in the proper period.

ARTICLE 69. Penalty to Be Imposed When the Crime Committed is Not Wholly Excusable. — A penalty lower by one or two degrees than that prescribed by law shall be imposed if the deed is not wholly excusable by reason of the lack of some of the conditions required to justify the same or to exempt from criminal liability in the several cases mentioned in articles 11 and 12, provided that the majority of such conditions be present. The courts shall impose the penalty in the period which may be deemed proper, in view of the number and nature of the conditions of exemption present or lacking.

ARTICLE 70. Successive Service of Sentences; Exception. — When the culprit has to serve two or more penalties, he shall serve them simultaneously if the nature of the penalties will so permit; otherwise, said penalties shall be executed successively, following the order of their respective severity, which shall be determined in accordance with the following scale:

1. Death.

2. Reclusión perpetua.

3. Reclusión temporal.

4. Prisión mayor.

5. Prisión correccional.

6. Arresto mayor.

7. Arresto menor.

A person sentenced to destierro who is also sentenced to the penalty of prisión or arresto shall be required to serve these latter penalties before serving the penalty of destierro.

ARTICLE 71. Fine. — The fine shall be considered as the last of all the principal penalties listed in the preceding article.

When a fine is so imposed, the duration of the subsidiary liability corresponding thereto, by reason of the insolvency of the offender, shall not exceed that which is provided in rule 2 of article 39.

ARTICLE 72. Preference in the Payment of the Civil Liabilities. — The civil liabilities of a person found guilty of two or more offenses shall be satisfied by following the chronological order of the dates of the final judgments rendered against him, beginning with the first in order of time.

SECTION THREE

Provision Common to the Last Two Preceding Sections

ARTICLE 73. Presumption in Regard to the Imposition of Accessory Penalties. — Whenever the courts shall impose a penalty which, by provision of law, carries with it other penalties, according to the provisions of articles 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, and 45 of this Code, it must be understood that the accessory penalties are also imposed upon the convict.

ARTICLE 74. Penalty Higher Than Reclusión Perpetua in Certain Cases. — In cases in which the law prescribes a penalty higher than another given penalty, without specifically designating the name of the former, if such higher penalty should be that of death, the same penalty and the accessory penalties of article 40, shall be considered as the next higher penalty.

ARTICLE 75. Increasing or Reducing the Penalty of Fine by One or More Degrees. — Whenever it may be necessary to increase or reduce the penalty of fine by one or more degrees, it shall be increased or reduced, respectively, for each degree, by one-fourth of the maximum amount prescribed by law, without, however, changing the minimum.

The same rules shall be observed with regard to fines that do not consist of a fixed amount, but are made proportional.

ARTICLE 76. Legal Period of Duration of Divisible Penalties. — The legal period of duration of divisible penalties shall be considered as divided into three parts, forming three periods, the minimum, the medium, and the maximum in the manner shown in the following table:

TABLE SHOWING THE DURATION OF DIVISIBLE PENALTIES AND THE TIME INCLUDED IN EACH OF THEIR PERIODS

Penalties

Time included in the penalty in its entirety

Time included in its minimum period

Time included in its medium period

Time included in its maximum

Reclusion temporal	From 12 years and 1 day to 20 years.	From 12 years and 1 day to 14 years and 8 months.	From 14 years, 8 months and 1 day to 17 years and 4 months.	From 17 years, 4 months and 1 day to 20 years.
Prision mayor, absolute disqualification and special temporary disqualification	From 6 years and 1 day to 12 years.	From 6 years and 1 day to 8 years.	From 8 years and 1 day to 10 years.	From 10 years and 1 day to 12 years.
Prision correccional, suspension anddestierro	From 6 months and 1 day to 6 years.	From 6 months and 1 day to 2 years and 4 months.	From 2 years, 4 months and 1 day to 4 years and 2 months.	From 4 years, 2 months and 1 day to 6 years.
Arresto mayor	From 1 month and 1 day to months.	From 1 to 2 months.	From 2 months and 1 day to 4 months.	From 4 months and 1 day to 6 months.
Arresto menor	From 1 to 30 days.	From 1 to 10 days.	From 11 to 20 days.	From 21 to 30 days.
ARTICLE 77. When the Penalty is a Complex One Composed of Three Distinct Penalties. — In cases in which the law prescribes a penalty composed of three distinct penalties, each one shall form a period; the lightest of them shall be the minimum, the next the medium, and the most severe the maximum period.

Whenever the penalty prescribed does not have one of the forms specially provided for in this book, the periods shall be distributed, applying by analogy the prescribed rules.