ARTICLE 96. Effect of Commutation of Sentence. — The commutation of the original sentence for another of a different length and nature shall have the legal effect of substituting the latter in the place of the former.

ARTICLE 97. Allowance for Good Conduct. — The good conduct of any prisoner in any penal institution shall entitle him to the following deductions from the period of his sentence:

1. During the first two years of his imprisonment, he shall be allowed a deduction of five days for each month of good behavior;

2. During the third to the fifth year, inclusive, of his imprisonment, he shall be allowed a deduction of eight days for each month of good behavior;

3. During the following years until the tenth year, inclusive, of his imprisonment, he shall be allowed a deduction of ten days for each month of good behavior; and

4. During the eleventh and successive years of his imprisonment, he shall be allowed a deduction of fifteen days for each month of good behavior.

ARTICLE 98. Special Time Allowance for Loyalty. — A deduction of one-fifth of the period of his sentence shall be granted to any prisoner who, having evaded the service of his sentence under the circumstances mentioned in article 158 of this Code, gives himself up to the authorities within 48 hours following the issuance of a proclamation announcing the passing away of the calamity or catastrophe referred to in said article.

ARTICLE 99. Who Grants Time Allowances. — Whenever lawfully justified the Director of Prisons shall grant allowances for good conduct. Such allowances once granted shall not be revoked.

TITLE FIVE

Civil Liability

CHAPTER ONE

Persons Civilly Liable for Felonies

ARTICLE 100. Civil Liability of Person Guilty of Felony. — Every person criminally liable for a felony is also civilly liable.

ARTICLE 101. Rules Regarding Civil Liability in Certain Cases. — The exemption from criminal liability established in subdivisions 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6 of article 12 and in subdivision 4 of article 11 of this Code does not include exemption from civil liability, which shall be enforced subject to the following rules:

First. In cases of subdivisions 1, 2, and 3 of article 12, the civil liability for acts committed by an imbecile or insane person, and by a person under nine years of age, or by one over nine but under fifteen years of age, who has acted without discernment, shall devolve upon those having such person under their legal authority or control, unless it appears that there was no fault or negligence on their part.

Should there be no person having such insane, imbecile or minor under his authority, legal guardianship, or control, or if such person be insolvent, said insane, imbecile, or minor shall respond with their own property, excepting property exempt from execution, in accordance with the civil law.

Second. In cases falling within subdivision 4 of article 11, the persons for whose benefit the harm has been prevented shall be civilly liable in proportion to the benefit which they may have received.

The courts shall determine, in their sound discretion, the proportionate amount for which each one shall be liable.

When the respective shares can not be equitably determined, even approximately, or when the liability also attaches to the Government, or to the majority of the inhabitants of the town, and, in all events, whenever the damage has been caused with the consent of the authorities or their agents, indemnification shall be made in the manner prescribed by special laws or regulations.

Third. In cases falling within subdivisions 5 and 6 of article 12, the persons using violence or causing the fears shall be primarily liable and secondarily, or, if there be no such persons, those doing the act shall be liable, saving always to the latter that part of their property exempt from execution.

ARTICLE 102. Subsidiary Civil Liability of Innkeepers, Tavernkeepers and Proprietors of Establishments. — In default of the persons criminally liable, innkeepers, tavernkeepers, and any other persons or corporations shall be civilly liable for crimes committed in their establishments, in all cases where a violation of municipal ordinances or some general or special police regulation shall have been committed by them or their employees.

Innkeepers are also subsidiarily liable for the restitution of goods taken by robbery or theft within their houses from guests lodging therein, or for the payment of the value thereof, provided that such guests shall have notified in advance the innkeeper himself, or the person representing him, of the deposit of such goods within the inn; and shall furthermore have followed the directions which such innkeeper or his representative may have given them with respect to the care of and vigilance over such goods. No liability shall attach in case of robbery with violence against or intimidation of persons unless committed by the innkeeper’s employees.

ARTICLE 103. Subsidiary Civil Liability of Other Persons. — The subsidiary liability established in the next preceding article shall also apply to employers, teachers, persons, and corporations engaged in any kind of industry for felonies committed by their servants, pupils, workmen, apprentices, or employees in the discharge of their duties.

CHAPTER TWO

What Civil Liability Includes

ARTICLE 104. What is Included in Civil Liability. — The civil liability established in articles 100, 101, 102, and 103, of this Code includes:

1. Restitution;

2. Reparation of the damage caused;

3. Indemnification for consequential damages.

ARTICLE 105. Restitution — How Made. — The restitution of the thing itself must be made whenever possible, with allowance for any deterioration or diminution of value as determined by the court.

The thing itself shall be restored, even though it be found in the possession of a third person who has acquired it by lawful means, saving to the latter his action against the proper person, who may be liable to him.

This provision is not applicable in cases in which the thing has been acquired by the third person in the manner and under the requirements which, by law, bar an action for its recovery.

ARTICLE 106. Reparation — How Made. — The court shall determine the amount of damage, taking into consideration the price of the thing, whenever possible, and its special sentimental value to the injured party, and reparation shall be made accordingly.

ARTICLE 107. Indemnification — What is Included. — Indemnification for consequential damages shall include not only those caused the injured party, but also those suffered by his family or by a third person by reason of the crime.

ARTICLE 108. Obligation to Make Restoration, Reparation for Damages, or Indemnification for Consequential Damages and Action to Demand the Same — Upon Whom it Devolves. — The obligation to make restoration or reparation for damages and indemnification for consequential damages devolves upon the heirs of the person liable.

The action to demand restoration, reparation, and indemnification likewise descends to the heirs of the person injured.

ARTICLE 109. Share of Each Person Civilly Liable. — If there are two or more persons civilly liable for a felony, the courts shall determine the amount for which each must respond.

ARTICLE 110. Several and Subsidiary Liability of Principals, Accomplices, and Accessories of a Felony — Preference in Payment. — Notwithstanding the provisions of the next preceding article, the principals, accomplices, and accessories, each within their respective class, shall be liable severally (in solidum) among themselves for their quotas, and subsidiarily for those of the other persons liable.

The subsidiary liability shall be enforced, first against the property of the principals; next, against that of the accomplices, and, lastly, against that of the accessories.

Whenever the liability in solidum or the subsidiary liability has been enforced, the person by whom payment has been made shall have a right of action against the others for the amount of their respective shares.

ARTICLE 111. Obligation to Make Restitution in Certain Cases. — Any person who has participated gratuitously in the proceeds of a felony shall be bound to make restitution in an amount equivalent to the extent of such participation.

CHAPTER THREE

Extinction and Survival of Civil Liability

ARTICLE 112. Extinction of Civil Liability. — Civil liability established in articles 100, 101, 102, and 103 of this Code shall be extinguished in the same manner as other obligations, in accordance with the provisions of the Civil Law.

ARTICLE 113. Obligation to Satisfy Civil Liability. — Except in case of extinction of his civil liability as provided in the next preceding article, the offender shall continue to be obliged to satisfy the civil liability resulting from the crime committed by him, notwithstanding the fact that he has served his sentence consisting of deprivation of liberty or other rights, or has not been required to serve the same by reason of amnesty, pardon, commutation of sentence, or any other reason.

BOOK TWO

Crimes and Penalties

TITLE ONE

Crimes Against National Security and the Law of Nations

CHAPTER ONE

Crimes Against National Security

SECTION ONE

Treason and Espionage

ARTICLE 114. Treason. — Any person who, owing allegiance to the United States or the Government of the Philippine Islands, not even a foreigner, levies war against them or adheres to their enemies, giving them aid or comfort within the Philippine Islands or elsewhere, shall be punished by reclusión perpetua to death and shall pay a fine not to exceed P20,000 pesos.

No person shall be convicted of treason unless on the testimony of two witnesses at least to the same overt act or on confession of the accused in open court.

ARTICLE 115. Conspiracy and Proposal to Commit Treason — Penalty. — The conspiracy or proposal to commit the crime of treason shall be punished respectively, by prisión mayor and a fine not exceeding P10,000 pesos, and prisión correccional and a fine not exceeding P5,000 pesos.

ARTICLE 116. Misprision of Treason. — Every person owing allegiance to the United States or the Government of the Philippine Islands, without being a foreigner, and having knowledge of any conspiracy against them, who conceals or does not disclose and make known the same, as soon as possible to the governor or fiscal of the province, or the mayor or fiscal of the city in which he resides, as the case may be, shall be punished as an accessory to the crime of treason.

ARTICLE 117. Espionage. — The penalty of prisión correccional shall be inflicted upon any person who:

1. Without authority therefor, enter a warship, fort or naval or military establishment or reservation to obtain any information, plans, photographs or other data of a confidential nature relative to the defense of the Philippine Archipelago; or

2. Being in possession, by reason of the public office he holds, of the articles, data or information referred to in the preceding paragraph, discloses their contents to a representative of a foreign nation.

The penalty next higher in degree shall be imposed if the offender be a public officer or employee.

SECTION TWO

Provoking War and Disloyalty in Case of War

ARTICLE 118. Inciting to War or Giving Motives for Reprisals. — The penalty of reclusión temporal shall be imposed upon any public officer or employee, and that of prisión mayor upon any private individual, who, by unlawful or unauthorized acts provokes or gives occasion for a war involving or liable to involve the Philippine Islands or exposes Filipino citizens to reprisals on their persons or property.

ARTICLE 119. Violation of Neutrality. — The penalty of prisión correccional shall be inflicted upon anyone who, on the occasion of a war in which the Government is not involved, violates any regulation issued by competent authority for the purpose of enforcing neutrality.

ARTICLE 120. Correspondence with Hostile Country. — Any person, who in time of war, shall have correspondence with an enemy country or territory occupied by enemy troops shall be punished:

1. By prisión correccional, if the correspondence has been prohibited by the Government;

2. By prisión mayor, if such correspondence be carried on in ciphers or conventional signs; and

3. By reclusión temporal, if notice or information be given thereby which might be useful to the enemy. If the offender intended to aid the enemy by giving such notice or information, he shall suffer the penalty of reclusión temporal to death.

ARTICLE 121. Flight to Enemy’s Country. — The penalty of arresto mayor shall be inflicted upon any person who, owing allegiance to the Government, attempts to flee or go to an enemy country when prohibited by competent authority.

SECTION THREE

Piracy and Mutiny on the High Seas

ARTICLE 122. Piracy in General and Mutiny on the High Seas. — The penalty of reclusión perpetua shall be inflicted upon any person who, on the high seas, shall attack or seize a vessel or, not being a member of its complement nor a passenger, shall seize the whole or part of the cargo of said vessel, its equipment or personal belongings of its complement or passengers.

The same penalty shall be inflicted in case of mutiny on the high seas.

ARTICLE 123. Qualified Piracy. — The penalty of reclusión temporal to death shall be imposed upon those who commit any of the crimes referred to in the preceding article, under any of the following circumstances:

1. Whenever they have seized a vessel by boarding or firing upon the same;

2. Whenever the pirates have abandoned their victims without means of saving themselves; or

3. Whenever the crime is accompanied by murder, homicide, physical injuries, or rape.

TITLE TWO

Crimes Against the Fundamental Laws of the State

CHAPTER ONE

Arbitrary Detention or Expulsion, Violation of Dwelling, Prohibition, Interruption, and Dissolution of Peaceful Meetings and Crimes Against Religious Worship

SECTION ONE

Arbitrary Detention and Expulsion

ARTICLE 124. Arbitrary Detention. — Any public officer or employee who, without legal grounds, detains a person, shall suffer:

1. The penalty of arresto mayor in its maximum period to prisión correccional in its minimum period, if the detention has not exceeded three days;

2. The penalty of prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods, if the detention has continued more than three but not more than fifteen days;

3. The penalty of prisión mayor, if the detention has continued for more than fifteen days but not more than six months; and

4. That of reclusión temporal, if the detention shall have exceeded six months.

The commission of a crime, or violent insanity or any other ailment requiring the compulsory confinement of the patient in a hospital, shall be considered legal grounds for the detention of any person.

ARTICLE 125. Delay in the Delivery of Detained Persons to the Proper Judicial Authorities. — The penalties provided in the next preceding article shall be imposed upon the public officer or employee who shall detain any person for some legal ground and shall fail to deliver such person to the proper judicial authorities within the period of one hour.

ARTICLE 126. Delaying Release. — The penalties provided for in article 124 shall be imposed upon any public officer or employee who delays for the period of time specified therein the performance of any judicial or executive order for the release of a prisoner or detention prisoner, or unduly delays the service of the notice of such order to said prisoner or the proceedings upon any petition for the liberation of such person.

ARTICLE 127. Expulsion. — The penalty of prisión correccional shall be imposed upon any public officer or employee who, not being thereunto authorized by law, shall expel any person from the Philippine Islands or shall compel such person to change his residence.

SECTION TWO

Violation of Domicile

ARTICLE 128. Violation of Domicile. — The penalty of prisión correccional in its minimum period shall be imposed upon any public officer or employee who, not being authorized by judicial order, shall enter any dwelling against the will of the owner thereof, search papers or other effects found therein without the previous consent of such owner, or, having surreptitiously entered said dwelling, and being required to leave the premises, shall refuse to do so.

If the offense be committed in the night-time, or if any papers or effects not constituting evidence of a crime be not returned immediately after the search made by the offender, the penalty shall be prisión correccional in its medium and maximum periods.

ARTICLE 129. Search Warrants Maliciously Obtained and Abuse in the Service of Those Legally Obtained. — In addition to the liability attaching to the offender for the commission of any other offense, the penalty of arresto mayor in its maximum period to prisión correccional in its minimum period and a fine not exceeding 1,000 pesos shall be imposed upon any public officer or employee who shall procure a search warrant without just cause, or, having legally procured the same, shall exceed his authority or use unnecessary severity in executing the same.

ARTICLE 130. Searching Domicile Without Witnesses. — The penalty of arresto mayor in its medium and maximum periods shall be imposed upon a public officer or employee who, in cases where a search is proper, shall search the domicile, papers or other belongings of any person, in the absence of the latter, any member of his family, or in their default, without the presence of two witnesses residing in the same locality.
